i. introduction
Lost in the swirling mists of the sea's embrace, a trade ship stumbled upon a strange creature.
Its form was reminiscent of a bird, yet its luminous beak pierced the darkness with an otherworldly glow.
Intrigued, they followed and soon discovered an uncharted island, teeming with curious creatures.
The peculiar island was full of mysterious creatures, from tiny, cute balls of fur to reptiles with massive, frightening fangs!
Word of this newfound land spread far and wide, captivating the hearts of adventurers, including yours.
Fueled by your love for animals and the thrill of discovery, you set sail for this mystifying island,
eager to explore its wonders firsthand.
GAME DESIGNER
C.W Yeom

ARTIST
Sophia Kang

GAME DEVELOPERS
Jaewoo Bang
Gunho Kim

ART DIRECTOR
Hani Chang

EDITOR
Lucya Lee

PLAYTESTERS
We want to show our appreciation for Brett Thompson, Greg Sherman, H.C. Harrington, Jan Adam, Lola O'Brien,
Matt Hillman & HP Gaming, Byeong Hak Jeon, Cheong Heo, Daun Jeong, Eun-Joo Kim, Geonhee Lee, Geonil,
Hope S. Hwang, Hyunseo Kim, Jeongrak Yoon, Jieun Kang, Jin ho Sohn, John Yeo, Jong-Hyeok Hong, Joong Sun Park,
Jun Bong Lee, Jun Young Jung, Kunkuk Kim, Kwangyong Na, Kyoung Won Kim, Seokju Jeong, Seong Jae Yu, Seong Woo Yun,
Seongjun Hong, Seung Pyo Hong, Su Bin Kim, Sunhyuck Chae, Woojin Yang, Yong Jun Kim, Yoobin Jin, Yoonku Kang
and the many playtesting groups who helped us to playtest the game.
SPECIAL THANKS TO WONDROUS CREATURES KICKSTARTER BACKERS
https://badcomet.co
info@badcomet.co

cards

boards and others

1 Supply Board
126 Creature Cards

4 Player Boards

19 Achievement Cards
5 Main, 7 Single-Species and
7 Multi-Species Achievement Cards

9 Captain Boards

12 Tingent Cards
(Solo mode)

4 Player Aids
1 Main Board

tokens

1 Egg Pouch

4 Lock Tokens

14 Habitat Tiles

20 Energies

8 Score Tokens

78 Eggs 11 Crustaceans, 11
Mammals, 11 Birds, 11 Reptiles,
11 Fish, 12 Insects, 11 Dragons

16 Trophies

12 Butterfly Nets

3 Target Tokens
(Solo mode)

5 Time Tokens

2 Time Tracks (4P)

meeples

12 Crew Members 1 magnetic and 2 regular meeples per color

Freya

Haoa

Macus

Cabot

24 Achievement
Markers

Tingent

Octavia

16 Resource
Trackers

Marie

4 Score
Trackers

Samuel

1 Time
Tracker

Helena

9 Captains All magnetic meeples

3

ii. game setup
general setup

d

c

a

3-Player Setup Example

e

v

5

3

2

x5

b
4
m

Time Track
6

7

h

4

f

9

l

k

g
i
j
1

j

u
8

11

10

12

n

p
Score Track

4

o

1

The Main Board is double-sided, with Side-A for 1-2 players
and Side-B for 3-4. Place the Main Board with the side that
corresponds to the number of players, face-up, in the center of
the table.

2 Place the Supply Board above the Main Board.

9

Set up the Time Track as shown.

k Shuffle the 2 Time Tokens selected in
Step 8, and place each, with their markings
not visible, face-down on the 2 rightmost
yellow-bordered spaces of the Time Track.

l Shuffle the remaining Time Tokens and place them face-down

3 Set up the Creature Cards on the Supply Board.

on the remaining yellow-bordered spaces of the Time Track.

a Deck: Shuffle all Creature Cards and place them face-down.
b Wilderness: Draw 6 cards from the deck and place them
face-up. This area is called the Wilderness.

4 Place a total of 35 Eggs, 5 of each species, into the Egg Pouch
and mix well. Place the Egg Pouch near the Main Board.

NOTE For 3-players, only 4 Time Tokens are used. The unused
Time Token is returned to the game box.

m Place a Time Tracker on the first space of the Time Track.
10 Place the Trophies on the Main Board. The number of Trophies
used depends on the number of players in the game.
No. of Players

NOTE There are 7 different species of Eggs, meaning a total of
35 Eggs should be placed inside the Egg Pouch.

5 Place Energies, Butterfly Nets and the remaining Eggs on the
Supply Board. This area is called the Supply.

c Eggs: Place

d Energies

the remaining Eggs

e Butterfly
Nets

2 Players

3 Players

4 Players

10

14

16

11 Place the Score Tokens near the Score Track.
12 Place 7 Achievement Cards with the side that corresponds to
the number of players, face-up, on the Main Board. However,
since Achievement Cards can't overlap in species, set up in the
following order:

n Main Achievements (brown-bordered)
6 Set up the Habitat Tiles on the Main board.
f Habitat Tile Stack: Shuffle all Habitat Tiles and place them
face-down.

g Habitat Tile Pool: Draw 3 Tiles from the Habitat Tile Stack
and place them face-up.
For 4-players, set up the additional components as follows.
Skip this step for 1-3 players.

7

8

h

Place the 2 additional Time Track pieces, covering the existing
Time Track on the Main Board.

i

Draw 1 Habitat Tile from the Habitat Tile Stack and place it
face-up on the 4 icon on the Map.

j

Randomly draw 2 Eggs from the Egg Pouch and place 1 on
each of the 2 4 icons on the Map.

Place the Eggs on the Map as follows.
· Shuffle all 5 Time Tokens face-down. Randomly select 2
Tokens and flip them face-up to reveal their markings.
· Draw random Eggs from the Egg Pouch and place 1 Egg on
each of the Hexes with the corresponding markings on the Map.
E.g. 2 randomly selected Time Tokens came out to be a
and an
mark. Draw an Egg from the pouch and place
1 on every
and
markings on the Map.

Time Tokens

· Shuffle all Main Achievement Cards and randomly place one
in each of the 3 brown spaces.
· If you are new to this game, we recommend starting with
Main Achievements number 1, 2, and 3 as pictured on the
previous page.

o Multi-Species Achievements (yellow-bordered)
· Shuffle all Multi-Species Achievement Cards and randomly
select one to place on a yellow space.
· Then, randomly select another Multi-Species Achievement
Card and place it on the other yellow space. However, make
sure that no species overlap with the species on the card
placed first. Continue drawing cards until this condition is met.

p Single-Species Achievements (turquoise-bordered)
· Examine all 7 Single-Species Achievement Cards and
remove all cards matching the 4 species placed during o .
· Of the remaining 3 Single-Species Achievement Cards
randomly select 2 and place them in the spaces outlined in
turquoise.
· Aside from the 7 Achievement Cards placed on the board
through n to p , all remaining Achievement Cards will
not be used and are to be returned to the game box.
NOTE Through the Multi-Species and Single-Species
Achievements, players should see 6 different species used in the
game that do not overlap.

5

q
13
t

14

r

17

18

19

16
s

15

player setup
13 Each player chooses a player color and takes the following in
their color:

q Take a Player Board and place it in front of you.
r Take 3 Crew Members and place them next to your Player Board.
s Take 6 Achievement Markers and place them on the left side
of your Player Board.
t Take 4 Resource Trackers and place them on each Resource
Track to represent having 1 of each resource. In other words,
position your Resource Trackers in the spaces marked 1
(second space from the left) on each Resource Track on your
Player Board.
u Take 1 Score Tracker and place it on the boat icon near the
Score Track (see page 4).

14 Each player takes 2 random Captain Boards. Choose one

16 Each player takes the Captain that aligns with the Captain

Board chosen. Combine the Crew member with the magnet on
its back with the Captain.

17 Each player takes the Lock Token corresponding to the chosen
player color and places it on their Captain Board.

18 Each player takes 1 Butterfly Net from the Supply and places it
on their Player Board.

19 Gain additional resources according to play order.
Play Order: The player to have befriended the most unusual
animal becomes the First Player. The game proceeds in a
clockwise direction, starting with the First Player.

Captain Board and place it on your Player Board. Return the
unused Captain Board to the box.
NOTE If all players are familiar with the game, proceed with
Steps 14 and 15 simultaneously.

15 Each player draws 8 Creature Cards from the deck. Choose 4 to
keep in your hand and discard the rest of the cards to the
discard pile.

v Discard Pile: When discarding, always discard face-up.
T I P When choosing which cards to keep, take a close look at
the Achievements. If some cards provide the opportunity to
accomplish Achievements, they can be of greater value.
NOTE During the game, the cards in your hand are not revealed
to other players. However, in the process of learning the game,
some text may be difficult to understand. In this case, show and ask
players with more experience to easily learn with their guidance.

6

· 1st Player: Does not receive additional resources. In other words,
the 1st player starts the game with one of each resource.
· 2nd Player: Move any 1 Resource Tracker one space to the right.
This means the 2nd player starts with 2 of any 1 desired
resource type and 1 each of the remaining three resource
types.
· 3rd Player: Move any 2 Resource Trackers one space to the right.
This means the 3rd player starts with 2 of any two desired
resource types and 1 each of the remaining 2 resource types.
· 4th Player: Move any 3 Resource Trackers one space to the right.
This means the 4th player starts with 2 of any three desired
resource types and 1 of the remaining resource type.
Now, we are ready to begin!

iii. game play
goal of the game

reserve building

The goal of Wondrous Creatures is to be the player with the highest
Victory Points (VPs) at the end of the game, which are represented
by the icons
and
.

To achieve a high score, you must create the most harmonious
reserve. To do this, you will need to collect various Creature Cards and
Eggs in your reserve. As each Creature Card holds its own unique
ability, it's important to bring cards into your reserve that fit and
synergize with your strategy. Additionally, it is very important to
create a reserve that helps complete the Achievements faster than
other players.

Scoring
1. Immediate Score: Indicated with a brown seal
icon. When obtained, immediately advance on the
Score Track.

1

· Score Track Rewards: The Score Track has 10 spaces that
provide rewards when you reach or pass the space. All
players who get to these reward spaces receive the
corresponding rewards.

Gain a Butterfly
Net from the
Supply

Gain a Discovery
Reward
(See page 11.)

Reserve
Refers to all your Creature Cards and
Eggs collected.

Gain a Trophy
from the Main
Board

T I P The Score Track Rewards will assist you throughout
the game. Therefore, it is important to appropriately time
obtaining these rewards through Immediate Scores.

· If you exceed 50 VPs, take a Score Token
and place it next to your Player Board with
the 50 side facing up. Reset your Score
Tracker to the first space on the Score
Score Token
Track and continue tracking your score.
· After exceeding 50 VPs, Score Track Rewards cannot be
obtained again even if you pass through the Reward Icon.
2. Ending Score: Indicated by the red seal icon,
these are the scores collected only after the game
ends. These scores are not counted during the
game (see page 20-21).
· When Ending Scores are tallied, you also advance your Score
Tracker, but you do NOT gain Score Track Rewards.

1

7

crew placement

game structure

In order to build a harmonious reserve, it is important to place your
Crew in purposeful positions. When placed on the Map, the Crew
interacts with all the adjacent Habitats to either acquire resources,
Creature Cards, or Eggs, but also to activate Special Effect Icons.

· All players take a turn each, clockwise, until the end of the game.
· Each player performs 1 Basic Action during their turn. Choose one
of the 4 Basic Actions for your turn:

Crew
Captain

Crew Members
· Crew members are workers who are placed on the Map to
interact with the Habitats on the Map to obtain resources,
cards, Eggs, etc.
· Every player uses a total of 3 Crew members, including
1 Captain. When referencing "Crew", this refers to all
3 Crew members, including the Captain.
· Captain: The component that combines a Captain Meeple
and a Crew Meeple is referred to as the Captain. Each
Captain has unique abilities that, once unlocked, allow you
to use them during the game (see page 16).
· Icons for the Crew are represented as follows.
Captain

1. Place a Crew Member
2. Play a Card(s)
3. Complete an Achievement
4. Recharge
NOTE You MUST perform 1 Basic Action on your turn. You are unable
to pass a turn without performing a Basic Action.

· Players can also perform as many Free Actions as they would like at
any time during their turn. Free Actions can be played before, after,
and even during a Basic Action.
· There are a total of 2 Free Actions:
1. Use a Butterfly Net
2. Use an Energy
· Once all the Trophies on the Main Board have been depleted, the
remaining players, excluding the player who depleted the last
Trophy, take one more turn each, and then the game ends.
· The player with the highest score wins.

Trophy

Crew
(Including the Captain)

Resources

Fruit

Coral

Flower

Mushroom

· This game has 4 resource types: Fruit, Coral, Flower, and
Mushroom.
· When you acquire a specific
resource, move the corresponding
Resource Tracker one space to
the right. Conversely, when
you spend a resource, move the
corresponding Resource Tracker
one space to the left.
· If the Resource Track cannot
Resource Tracks
advance any further, you cannot
acquire the resource. Therefore,
players cannot have more than 6
resources of 1 type at one time.

Any Resource

8

· Any Resource: Refers to any of the
resources - Fruit, Coral, Flower, Mushroom.
E.g, if you gain any 1 resource, choose 1 of
the 4 resource types to obtain.

· When the game will end is determined by the number of
Trophies on the Main Board.
· Trophies award 3 VPs each at the end of the game.
· Trophies are primarily obtained through Achievements
but can also be obtained when you reach 30 and 50 VPs
on the Score Track.
· If there are no more Trophies left to obtain, you cannot
obtain them anymore.
T I P Predict when the game will end based on the number
of Trophies remaining and modify your strategy and tactics
accordingly.

iv. basic actions
Each player performs 1 Basic Action during their turn.
There are a total of 4 Basic Actions:
Place a Crew Member, Play a Card(s), Complete an Achievement, and Recharge.

1. place a crew member

Habitat

Place a Crew member on the Map and obtain resources or Creature
Cards from adjacent Habitats, and/or acquire Eggs. This is the most
fundamental Action to build a reserve.

1

2

Select a Crew member from your Player Board and place it on
the Map. Placement Rules must be met upon placement (see
page 10).
· If all of your Crew members have been placed on the Map, with
none left on your Player Board, this Action cannot be performed.

If a Crew member was placed on a Hex with an Egg, collect the
Egg and place it on your Player Board.
· Collected Eggs are placed sequentially, in number order as
written on the Player Board.
· Egg Storage Reward: If there is a reward shown where an Egg
is to be placed, receive the reward immediately.

Fruit
Habitat

Coral
Habitat

Flower
Habitat

Mushroom
Habitat

· There are 4 types of Habitats on the Map. Each Habitat
pictures 1 of the 4 food groups that grow in the area.
· Some Habitats have Special Effect Icons
that provide various abilities. You can activate
a Special Effect Icon by using a Butterfly Net
(see page 19).
· When obtaining a resource from an adjacent Habitat, advance your
corresponding Resource Tracker 1 space to the right.
· When obtaining a Creature Card from an adjacent Habitat, take 1
Creature Card from the Wilderness with the corresponding Habitat
Icon and add it to your hand.
Habitat Icon

applet

· Located on the upper right
corner of the Creature Cards.
· E.g. Applet can be obtained
through a Fruit Habitat.
STORY Applet’s main diet is Fruits,
so players can encounter this
Creature in the Fruit Habitats.

3

The placed Crew member interacts with all adjacent Habitats.
From each adjacent Habitat, gain a corresponding resource OR a
Creature Card that has the corresponding Habitat Icon from the
Wilderness.
E.g., you choose to place your Crew member adjacent to a
Fruit Habitat and Mushroom Habitat. From the Fruit Habitat,
you can either gain 1 Fruit OR take 1 Creature Card from the
Wilderness with the Fruit Habitat Icon. From the Mushroom
Habitat, you can either gain 1 Mushroom OR take 1 Creature
Card from the Wilderness with the Mushroom Habitat Icon.

E.g., you wish to obtain a Creature Card through an adjacent
Fruit Habitat. Of the 6 cards in the Wilderness, take 1 of the
2 cards with the Fruit Habitat Icon and add it to your hand.

· If there are no Creatures Cards in the Wilderness with a
corresponding Habitat Icon, you cannot obtain a Creature Card
through the Habitat.

9

Hand

Crew Placement Rules

When obtaining a card through a Habitat, you add the card to
your HAND, not to your reserve. To play the card in your
reserve, you need to pay the cost (see pages 12-13). Likewise,
through card abilities and Captain abilities, whether drawing
cards or taking cards from the Wilderness, the cards are
always added into your hand.
Draw 1 card from
the Creature Card
deck and add it
to your hand.

Take 1 card from
the Wilderness
and add it to
your hand.

You can have as many cards in your hand as you wish.
However, when performing a Recharge Action, there is a
hand limit of 5 Creature Cards. You must discard any excess
cards to meet the 5-card hand limit. Therefore, be mindful of
the number of cards in your hand before proceeding with a
Recharge Action (see page 17).

· From a single Habitat, you can only obtain 1 resource OR
1 Creature Card. You cannot obtain both from 1 Habitat.
· If a Crew member is adjacent to multiple Habitats, you can
select a different reward for each Habitat.

a

b

d

1. The Map is made up of Hexes and Crew members must be
placed across two adjoining Hexes.
NOTE The direction in
which the Crew is facing does
not affect the game.

2. Each Hex can only hold 1 Crew member. Therefore, 2 Crew
members cannot be placed overlapping the same Hex.

3. There are 4 different hex types and the following rules
apply:
Plains

Mountain

No cost for
placing
Crew.

Pay any
1 resource to
place Crew.

Lake

Habitat

Crew placement
not allowed.

· Crew members can be freely placed on Plains.
· To place a Crew member on Mountain hex(es), you must
first pay the cost of "any 1 resource". Whether you place
the Crew member on 1 Mountain hex & 1 Plain hex a , or
2 Mountain hexes b , you will need to pay any 1 resource.

c
b
a
e

f

E.g., you placed your Crew member adjacent to 1 Fruit
Habitat and 2 Coral Habitats. You decide to gain a Coral
from the Coral Habitat bb by increasing the Coral
Resource Track by 1 d on the Player Board. You decide to
gain a Creature Card from Coral Habitat cc by bringing
Creature Card e with a Coral Habitat Icon from the
Wilderness into your hand. You also decide to gain a
Creature Card from Fruit Habitat a by bringing Creature
Card f with a Fruit Habitat Icon from the Wilderness
into your hand. As a result of the “Place a Crew Member”
Action, you gained a Coral and 2 Creature Cards.

10

STORY Due to the challenging nature of the mountainous
terrain compared to the Plains, an additional cost is collected.
NOTE In very rare cases, when the only available space(s)
for your Crew member to be placed are Mountain hex(es), and
you do not possess any 1 resource to cover the cost, you may
place your Crew member on the Mountain(s) without paying
the cost.

· Crew members cannot be placed on Lake hexes or Habitat
hexes under any circumstances. Through the course of the
game, Lakes will be covered with Habitat Tiles.

Discovery

Wilderness

As the game progresses, the Score Track's Discovery rewards
will transform Lake hexes into Habitat hexes. Therefore, more
Habitats will emerge on the Map as the game unfolds.

1

When your Score Tracker reaches or passes the Discovery
icon, you immediately receive the discovery reward.
NOTE
The Discovery icons are
located on the Score Track
at 5, 25, and 40 VPs.

1. When your turn ends, if any space(s) in the Wilderness is
empty, refill it completely before the next player starts their
turn. If the deck is empty, shuffle the discard pile to form a
new deck.
2. During your turn, if there are no cards in the Wilderness you
would like, you can Sweep to refresh some of the cards in the
Wilderness. Sweeps can be performed by activating the abilities
of specific Creature Cards or Special Effect Icons (see page 19).
Sweep: From the Wilderness, discard all cards from
the 3 leftmost slots a OR discard all cards from
the 3 rightmost slots b . Draw 3 new cards from
the deck and refill that side of the Wilderness pool.

2 Choose one desired Habitat Tile from the three available
in the Habitat Tile Pool.

3 Place the selected Habitat Tile on the desired Lake hex
on the Map.

· If there is an Egg on the Lake hex where you place the
Habitat Tile, acquire that Egg.
· You cannot place an additional Habitat Tile on a Lake
hex where a Habitat Tile has already been placed.

a
E.g., you've decided to play the
Nighthief, and currently as pictured
below, there are only 4 cards left in
the Wilderness. Through Nighthief's
ability, you sweep and take 1 card

b

nighthief

from the Wilderness. You decide to discard all cards from the 3
rightmost slots and discard the 2 remaining cards in those slots
into the discard pile. Subsequently, you draw 3 new cards from
the deck to replenish just the rightmost slots. When Sweeping,
regardless of the number of discarded cards, always draw 3
cards to fill the Wilderness. Afterward, you take 1 card from the
5 cards available in the Wilderness and add it to your hand.

4 Refill the Habitat Tile Pool from the Habitat Tile Stack.
NOTE If you need to place two Habitat Tiles in one turn
due to scoring a substantial number of VPs, after selecting
the first tile, immediately refill the pool. For the second tile,
choose from the three options.

5 Now, all players can interact with the newly revealed
Habitat Tiles in the same way as they would with
existing Habitats.
T I P Consider your strategy when deciding where to
place the Habitat Tiles! Placing them where you can obtain
a desired Egg or next to your Crew member can be a
strategically advantageous choice.
STORY As your adventure progresses, you become
increasingly familiar with the island. Terrains that were
initially perceived as lakes due to the dense mists are
gradually revealing themselves to be habitats teeming with
creatures!

After playing the Nighthief, you decide to end your turn. Since
there are still empty spaces in the Wilderness, before the next
player starts their turn, draw 2 cards from the deck and fill the
remaining empty spaces in the Wilderness.

Butterfly Net Habitat
· There is 1 Butterfly Net Habitat on the Map.
· When adjacent to this Habitat, you gain
1 Butterfly Net from the Supply, NOT a
resource or Creature Card. For more details
on Butterfly Nets, refer to page 19.

11

2. play a card(s)

Creature Card

You can play up to 2 Creature Cards from your hand to your reserve.
A Creature Card obtained through the "Place a Crew Member" Action
is not yet a Creature collected into your reserve. You must play the
card by paying the costs that each Creature needs as food. Only the
cards that are played this way are treated as Creatures collected in
the reserve, and only then can you use the Creature’s abilities.

a Cost: Resources required to play the Creature Card.
Cost of the card refers to the total number of resources
that are required when playing a card.

e
Habitat Icon

a
Cost

f
Species Icon

pharabog

nidmight

b
d

Card Type

Ending Score

c
Abilities

1 Card Selection: Select a Creature Card from your hand to play.
2 Payment: Pay the costs a shown on the left side of the card.
STORY These are the nutrients needed by the Creature in order to
successfully settle the Creature into your reserve.

Instant Card: The card’s ability is activated
immediately after playing the card.

4 Energy Placement: If an Energy Card
g

pheoxi

E.g., if you've just played the
Pheoxi, immediately take 2
Energies from the Supply and
place them on the card.
NOTE When in very rare cases, if there are not enough Energies
in the Supply to place on the Energy Cards, please use an
appropriate replacement token instead.

5 Card Ability Activation: Depending on the Card type bb ,
activate the card effect indicated in c . Depending on the
Card type, the card effect may occur as soon as the card is
played, or at a certain point thereafter. Please refer to the
section on the right for more details.

6 Play an Additional Card: Players can play up to 2 cards with a

single "Play a Card(s)" Action. When playing a 2nd card, repeat
Steps 1 to 5 once more.

T I P In order to efficiently use this Action, it is recommended
that 2 cards are played each time this Action is taken.

12

b Card Type: Once you play a Creature Card to your reserve,
you are now able to activate the Creature's abilities c .
Creature Cards are categorized into 5 types based on
when the card ability is activated.

3 Placement: Play the card face-up to your reserve.

was played, take the number of
Energies indicated on the right side of
the card g from the Supply and place
them on the card. For more on Energies,
see page 18.

E.g., Pharabog in your reserve gives you 2 VPs each time
you play a card with a cost of 4 resources or more into your
reserve. Nidmight's cost is 2 Fruits + 2 Flowers, which
equals 4 resources, meeting the criteria for Pharabog's
ability. Therefore, playing Nidmight allows you to gain 2
VPs through Pharabog.

Recharge Card: The card's ability is activated
every time you perform a Recharge Action.
For more on Recharge Actions, see page 17.
End Card: The card's ability is activated at the end
of the game. Ending Scores are awarded according
to the conditions specified in the card. For more on
end of game, see page 20.
Energy Card: The card’s ability is activated when
you use an Energy from the card. Since using
Energies is a Free Action, Energies can be freely
used at any time during your turn. For more on
Energies, see page 18.
Continuous Card: The card's ability is activated
whenever the specific conditions specified in the
card's abilities are met during the game.
E.g., if you've played the
Thunderilla, you would gain 2 VPs
each time you gain a Trophy
during the game, hereafter.

thunderilla

c Abilities: Every Creature Card has its own unique ability.
For more on each ability, see pages 28-31.

· Creature Cards always provide their effects only to the
player who played the card.
· When activating multiple cards simultaneously, you can
use card abilities in the order you prefer.
· When a card's ability involves counting icons in your
reserve, it also includes its own icon(s).
· When you play a card, you are not required to activate the
card's effect if you choose not to. However, if you decide
to activate the ability, you must follow these conditions:
· - If a card has multiple abilities, execute the effect
described first.
· - Multiple abilities indicated by an arrow: You must
execute the effect on the left side of the arrow to
obtain the effect shown on the right. In such
situations, you can choose to forego the effect on the
right side or opt to partially obtain the effect on the
right side.
· - Multiple abilities without an arrow: You can execute all
effects, none of the effects, or just parts of the effects.

finhead

E.g., when activating Shellmit, you gain 2 VPs for each Coral
Habitat icon in your reserve. Including Shellmit, you have a
total of 4 Coral Habitat icons, scoring 4 x 2 VPs = 8 VPs.

shellmit

* Habitat Resource: refers to the resource from
the specified Creature Card's Habitat.
E.g., when activating Floratzel, you take a card from the
Wilderness and gain 2 of its Habitat Resource. If you took
Eggorgeous from the Wilderness using Floratzel's ability,
you immediately obtain 2 Flowers, which are the Habitat
Resource of Eggorgeous.

housilk
floratzel

E.g., When activating Finhead, you hatch one of your Eggs
to obtain one Egg of your choice. In this case, you cannot
choose to just obtain the Egg of your choice without
hatching one. When activating Housilk, you gain any 1
resource and flip up to 2 of your Eggs. In this case, if you
wish, you can choose to receive just the one resource
without flipping any Egg(s) OR you can choose to just flip
the Egg(s) without receiving a resource.

eggorgeous

f Species Icon: All Creature Cards have 1 or 2 species icons.
· 7 species appear in Wondrous Creatures.

d Ending Score: The number of VPs the card provides at
the end of the game.

Crustacean Mammal Bird

e Habitat Icon: Depicts the corresponding Habitat on the
Map where the Creature Card can be obtained from.
· Icons in the game are represented as follows.

Flower
Fruit Habitat Coral Habitat
Habitat Icon
Icon
Icon

Mushroom
Habitat Icon

Reptile

Fish

Insect Dragon

· Some Creature Cards have 2 different species icons.
E.g., Eggorgeous is both a Reptile and an Insect.
STORY Many Creatures discovered on this mysterious island
do not fit our existing animal classification. We may soon need
a new animal classification system!
T I P If you were to collect a large amount of a certain
species icon in your reserve, you could earn high VPs through
Achievement or certain Creature Card abilities.

13

· The Egg is double-sided:

Recommended Reserve Layout

Eggs

During the game, you will bring various cards into you reserve.
For Instant Cards, as there is no need to revisit these abilities
(aside from the last played Instant Card), it is recommended
to stack them with the last played card on top. Occasionally,
you may need to track the latest Instant Card, so stacking
them in the order they were played can be very helpful.
Other than Instant Cards, all others may need occasional
revisiting during the game; therefore, rather than stacking
them, it is more convenient to spread out the remaining cards
in a way that makes them easy to review.
Sequentially
stacked

Spread out for
easy reference

1. Eggs: The Egg is double-sided, featuring an Unhatched side
(color) and a Hatched side(black and white).
Unhatched
Side

Hatched
Side

· Eggs are treated as 1 species icon.
· Hatched Eggs cannot be used for Achievements.
2. Hatching
· Flip an Unhatched Egg to the Hatched side.
· Hatching can be performed by activating
the abilities of specific Creature Cards or by
completing Achievements (see more on page 15).

Hatch

3. Flipping
· Flip an Egg to its other side. You can flip an Egg
on its Unhatched Side to the Hatched side or
revert an Egg from the Hatched side to the
Flip
Unhatched side.
· Flipping can be performed by activating the abilities of
specific Creature Cards, Special Effect Icons, or Captain
abilities.
4. Collecting Eggs
· Eggs are primarily obtained from the Map. During a "Place
a Crew Member" Action, if you place a Crew member in the
SAME hex as an Egg, you collect that Egg (see page 9).
· As a Free Action, you are able to use a Butterfly Net to
collect an Egg from your adjacent Hexes (see page 19).
· Eggs can also be collected through Creature Cards’
abilities, Captain abilities or Special Effect Icons.
NOTE In very rare cases, if there is an insufficient supply of
Eggs of a specific species, they become unavailable to obtain.

5. Storing Eggs: Once you collect an Egg, store it on your
Player Board, making sure to place them Unhatched side up.

· Store the Eggs in numerical order, corresponding to the
numbers indicated on the Egg Storage section of the
Player Board.
· Receive the reward from the Egg Storage section
immediately. E.g., if you acquired a third Egg, as shown
above, you immediately gain 1 VP (see more on page 32).
6. Egg Storage Limit: Each player can collect up to 12 Eggs. If
you acquire an additional Egg when your Egg Storage is full,
you cannot collect the extra Egg, but receive 2 VPs instead.

+: 2
NOTE

14

Once Eggs are stored in the Player Board, under no
circumstances can they be removed from the Board.

3. complete an achievement
When you satisfy the conditions indicated on an Achievement Card,
you can complete the Achievement. To obtain a high score, it's
important to complete Achievements that fit your strategy faster than
the other players.

1

Marker. For more on Achievement Marker rewards, see page 32.
· If you wish, you can choose to receive 2 VPs d instead of the
corresponding Achievement Marker Reward.

2

Select an Achievement Marker: Once you have met the condition
for an Achievement, select a desired Achievement Marker from
a remaining on your Player Board.
the Achievement Markers (a)

· If there are no Achievement Markers left on the Player Board, no
more Achievements can be completed. Hence, you can complete
up to 6 Achievements.

a

b
Achievement
Marker
Rewards

5 Obtain a Trophy: From the Trophies on the Main Board, take
1 Trophy and place it next to your Player Board.
· If there are no Trophies left, you can still complete Achievements,
but you will not be able to receive a Trophy.
NOTE Each Achievement Slot provides Ending Scores. These VPs
are not awarded immediately upon completing the Achievement but
are calculated at the end of the game.

Achievement
Markers

2

4 Obtain an Achievement Marker Reward: Immediately obtain
Reward b that corresponds to the chosen Achievement

6 Unlock your Captain Ability: If you completed your first

e

Achievement, your Captain ability unlocks. Remove the Lock
Token e from your Captain Board to indicate that the
Captain ability is now accessible.

d

Place an Achievement Marker: Place the selected Achievement
Marker in the slot dedicated to the accomplished Achievement.

c

E.g., you've met the upper slot condition for the Bird
Achievement by collecting 7 Bird species icons f . You choose
1 of your Achievement Markers g and place it in the upper
slot of the corresponding Achievement Card h .

Achievement
Slot

· Each Achievement Slot can only occupy 1 Achievement Marker as
they are on a first-come, first-serve basis. Therefore, later
players who meet the Achievement conditions cannot place their
Achievement Marker in an Achievement Slot already occupied by
another player's Achievement Marker.
· You can only complete each Achievement
once. Therefore, if your Achievement
Marker is already on an Achievement
Card, you cannot achieve it again.
· Once an Achievement Marker is placed in
an Achievement Slot, it cannot be returned
to the Player Board or moved to another Achievement Slot.

3 Hatch Used Eggs: If you used Egg(s) to complete an
Achievement, hatch all the used Eggs. Hatched Eggs cannot be
used to complete other Achievements until they are flipped into
their Unhatched Side.
· If you've exceeded the Achievement goal, you can decide which
Egg(s) or species icon(s) on the Creature Card(s) to use towards
completing the Achievement.

f

g

j
k

h
You used 3 Eggs to complete the Achievement; therefore,
hatch the used Eggs by flipping them to their hatched side
i . At your discretion, you can also choose to use 4 Eggs and
2 bird icons from the cards to complete the Achievement and
flip 4 Eggs accordingly. As your Achievement Marker Reward,
take a Butterfly Net j from the Supply and place it on your
Player Board. Additionally, take 1 Trophy from the Main Board
and place it next to your Player Board. As it was your first
Achievement, remove your Lock Token k from your Captain
Board. Through completing this Achievement, you will earn 12
Ending Scores at the end of the game; this does not affect the
ongoing score count during gameplay.

i

15

3 Types of Achievements

Captain Ability

1. Main Achievement
· Unlike Single and Multi-Species Achievements, there is only
1 condition for the Main Achievements. The sooner you
fulfill this condition, the higher the score obtained.
E.g., you can complete the
Achievement if you have 8 or
more Unhatched Eggs in your
reserve. If you're the first
player to fulfill this
Achievement, you accomplish
the upper slot. If you're the
second player to fulfill this Achievement, you accomplish the
lower slot.
2. Single-Species Achievement
· You need to collect an amount equal to or more than the
number of the single species icon on the card.
· The more of the specified species icon you collect, the
higher the reward you will receive.
E.g., you need to collect Fish
Icons in your reserve. You can
accomplish the upper slot by
collecting 6 or more Fish, the
lower slot by collecting 3 or
more. The Fish Eggs on their
Hatched sides are not counted.
3. Multi-Species Achievement
· You need to collect an amount equal to or more than the
combined number of the 2 species icons on the card.
· The number of icons is calculated by adding the number of
both species icons in your reserve.
· There is no need to have both icons collected as 1 of the 2
will suffice.
· The more of the specified species icon you collect, the
higher the reward you will receive.
E.g., you can accomplish the
upper slot by collecting 8 or
more Mammal and/or Fish
Icons in your reserve, the
lower slot by collecting 5 or
more. You can complete the
Achievement by collecting
just Mammals or just Fish, or you can complete the
Achievement by collecting a mixture of the two. The Eggs
on their Hatched sides are not counted.

T I P For Single/Multi-Species Achievements, there are instances
where it may be better to achieve a lower slot than the upper slot. This is
because if you achieve the lower slots quickly, you'll be able to quickly
obtain the Achievement Marker Rewards and unlock your Captain ability
faster, providing the opportunity to play in a richer environment.

16

· Players have differing Captain abilities depending on their
chosen Captain Board.
· Captain abilities are initially locked at the beginning of the
game and become available after accomplishing the first
Achievement.
· When unlocked, the Captain's ability activates each time the
Captain is placed on the Map. Your Captain's ability can be
triggered at any time in your turn during the "Place a Crew
Member" Action.
Therefore, you can either place the Captain on the Map,
acquire the resources and/or cards from adjacent Habitats,
and then use the Captain's ability OR, you can activate the
Captain's ability first and then acquire the resources and/or
cards from adjacent Habitats.
· Even after unlocking the Captain's ability and placing the
Captain on the Map, you can choose not to use the Captain's
ability.
· If the Captain's ability is locked, the ability does not activate
when the Captain is placed on the Map.
· Placing regular Crew members on the Map does not activate
the Captain's ability.
· For more on Captain abilities, see pages 27-28.

4. recharge
The Recharge Action can only be performed when all 3 of your Crew
members are placed on the Map. If your 3 Crew members are placed
on the Map and there are no more Basic Actions you can or would
like to take, return your 3 Crew members to your Player Board to
Recharge.

1

c
d

Retrieve Crew: Take all 3 Crew members from the Map and place
them next to your Player Board. Recharge Action can only be
performed when all 3 of your Crew members are placed on the
Map.

e
all empty hexes displaying the
markings on the Map. Among
c , d and e marked with an
Marking, an Egg is
already placed in Hex cc . Therefore, no additional Egg is
placed on c . From the Egg Pouch, randomly draw an Egg and
place it, Unhatched side up, on Hex d . For Hex e , since it is
occupied by another player's Crew member, no Egg is placed in
e . As a result, a total of 1 Egg was newly placed on the Map.

2

Advance the Time Tracker one space to the right on the Time
Track.
· If there is an icon on the newly advanced space, perform the
icon's effect immediately.
Receive a Butterfly Net from the Supply.
NOTE Only the player who performed the Recharge
Action and advanced the Time Tracker to the
corresponding space receives a Butterfly Net.

· If there is a Time Token on the advanced space, check the
token and place Eggs on the Map.

FRONT

Full Sweep: Discard all cards in the Wilderness and
refill from the deck.

BACK

Remove 1 Trophy from the Main Board.
NOTE If applying the effects of this icon results in
the removal of all Trophies from the Main Board, the
Games End condition is triggered (see page 20).

Time Token
· Turn over the Time Token on the advanced Time Track space
to see where the Eggs will be newly placed.
· Locate all the relevant markings on the Map. If there are
empty hexes with the corresponding marking, draw Eggs
randomly from the Egg Pouch and place them one by one.
· If the hexes with the corresponding marking already have
Eggs, are occupied by any Crew member, or are covered by a
Habitat Tile, you cannot place new Eggs on those hexes.
NOTE As the game progresses and more Habitat Tiles are
placed on the Map, the number of hexes where Eggs can be
placed will gradually decrease.

a

b

· The game does not end immediately upon
reaching the last space on the Time Track.
The Time Tracker remains in the last space,
and the next player to perform the
Recharge Action repeats applying the
effects of the icon on the last space
(receive a Butterfly Net and remove one
Trophy from the Main Board).

3 Discard Creature Cards that exceed the hand limit of 5 cards.
· You can only have a maximum of 5 Creature Cards in hand during
Recharge. If you have more than 5 cards, you must discard the
excess cards from your hand to the discard pile.
STORY Light hands make for a sufficient recharge.

E.g., you perform a Recharge Action and advance the Time
Tracker forward by 1 space a . If there happens to be a Time
Token on the advanced space, flip it over b and check the
marking. As the Token shows a
marking, place Eggs on

4 Activate all Recharge Cards in your reserve in your preferred
order.

NOTE Even if activating the Recharge Cards results in having more
than 5 Creature Cards in hand, since Step 3 has already been
performed, cards do not need to be discarded.

17

v. free actions
There are a total of 2 Free Actions: Use a Butterfly Net, Use an Energy.
On your turn, you can perform as many of the Free Actions as you wish to.

1. use an energy
a Energies
NOTE When you place Energy
Card(s) into your reserve, take the
number of Energies indicated on the
right side of the card b from the
Supply and place them on the card
(see page 12).

b Energy Limit

· You cannot use the Energies on one card to activate a card ability
of another. Energies on a specific card can only be used to
activate that specific card's ability.
· You can use multiple Energies in one turn. However, the Energies
of 1 card can only be used ONCE PER TURN. In other words, even
if there are multiple Energies placed on a card, only 1 on each card
can be used per turn.
· Cards with no Energy left can no longer activate their abilities
until they are restored.

Restore Energy Card

c Card abilities

· At any time during your turn, you can discard one of your Energies
a to activate the ability of the card c on which that Energy
was placed.

E.g., if you discard 1 Energy from the card above, activate
1 Recharge Card in your reserve as a Free Action.

· Discarded Energies are returned to the Supply.
· If the Energy Card states conditions other than just the use of an
Energy to activate its effects, the effect cannot be activated by
solely using an Energy when the conditions are not met.

fafkeen

18

E.g., Fafkeen includes a
condition for using an
Energy. You are only able to
use an Energy when you
have no cards in your hand.
When you meet the condition
and use the Energy, you
draw 4 cards and gain each
of their Habitat Resources. If
you do have any cards in
your hand, you cannot use
the Energy on this card.

· Select 1 Energy Card to restore it to its full Energy Limit b .
· The number of Energies on an Energy Card cannot exceed
the Energy Limit.
· You can restore an Energy Card through Special Effect
Icons, card abilities, and Achievement Marker Rewards.

2. use a butterfly net

2

· At any time during your turn, you can spend your Butterfly Nets to
obtain an adjacent Egg OR to activate a Special Effect Icon in an
adjacent Habitat.
· By using 1 Butterfly Net, you cannot obtain an Egg and also
activate a Special Effect Icon.
· You can use multiple Butterfly Nets in one turn.
· Used Butterfly Nets are returned to the Supply.
· Butterfly Nets can be obtained through various rewards in the
game: Score Track, Achievement Marker Rewards, Captain abilities,
Net Habitat, and Creature Card abilities. When acquiring a Butterfly
Net, take 1 from the Supply and place it on the Player Board.
· You can have up to 3 Butterfly Nets. If you already possess 3
Butterfly Nets and are about to gain an additional Net, you cannot
acquire any more Butterfly Nets but instead immediately gain 1 VP.

Activate an Adjacent Special Effect Icon

· You can use a Butterfly Net to activate one of the Special Effect
Icons adjacent to any of your Crew Members on the Map.
· Special Effects hold various powerful abilities. For instance,
through activating Special Effect Icons, you'll be able to play a
card into your reserve, activate your card, flip your Eggs, etc.
For more on various Special Effect Icons, see page 32.

e

+ 1
:
Be careful not to exceed the Butterfly Net limit!
NOTE For convenience, Butterfly Nets will sometimes be shortened
and referred to as “Nets”.
TIP

1 Obtain an Adjacent Egg
· You can use a Net to take any 1 Egg adjacent to any of your Crew
members on the Map and place it Unhatched side up on your
Player Board.
· Upon obtaining an Egg, immediately receive the Egg Storage
reward depicted on the corresponding Egg Storage space.

E.g., using a Net, you can obtain either a Fish Egg a or a
Crustacean Egg b adjacent to your Crew member.
However, Dragon Egg c cannot be collected as it is 2 hexes
away and not adjacent to any of your Crew members. If you
use a Net to collect Fish Egg a , take it from the Map and
store it in your Player Board unhatched side up. Gain 1 VP
immediately as the Egg Storage Reward.

d

f

E.g., using a Butterfly Net, you can either activate Special
Effect Icon dd or fe . or f . If you use a Butterfly
Net to activate Special Effect Icon d , draw 2 cards from
the deck.
T I P Various combos are possible by strategically using the
Special Effect Icons. Therefore, it's essential to identify the necessary
Special Effect Icons when placing your Crew member on the Map.

· Using a Net, each Special Effect Icon can only be activated
ONCE PER TURN. Even if you use multiple Nets, you cannot
activate the same Special Effect Icon twice in a turn.
NOTE Even if two or more of your Crew members are adjacent to a
single Special Effect Icon, you cannot use Nets to activate the same
Special Effect Icon multiple times in a turn.

· The restriction above only applies when using a Net. However,
through Captain abilities and card effects, you can activate a
single Special Effect Icon multiple times in a turn.

c
g

a

sealocanth

b
E.g., on this turn, you played the Sealocanth, activating
the Special Effect Icon g through the card's ability. In
the same turn, you can use a Net to activate the same
Special Effect icon (g) again. However, once a Special
Effect Icon has been activated using a Net in a turn, even
if you use an additional Net in the same turn, you cannot
activate the g icon again.

19

vi. end of the game
end of the game conditions

1. End Card Scores in your reserve.

If all the Trophies on the Main Board have been depleted, the current
player finishes their current turn, then every other player takes one
more turn, in order - after which the game ends.

E.g., let's say the game was being played in the order A> B> C.
Player B completes an Achievement and takes the last
remaining Trophy on the Main Board. Since all Trophies have
been depleted, Player C takes the last turn first, followed by
A taking the final turn. Afterward, the game ends, and scores
are calculated.
B’s
turn

C’s
turn

A’s
turn

B’s
turn:
Depleted
Trophies

C’s
last
turn

A’s
last
turn

End Cards: End Cards have a Bell
icon within a red background.

End Cards Scores
E.g., gain 1 VP per ALL Crustacean in
your reserve.
2. Ending Scores of all Creature Cards in your reserve.

End
of
Game

score calculations
Once the game is over, scores are calculated in the following order:
1. End Card Scores in your reserve.
2. Ending Scores of all Creature Cards in your reserve.
3. Ending Scores of all your completed Achievement Slots.
4. 3 VPs per Trophy.
5. 1 VP for every 4 resources and/or Butterfly Nets.
· When calculating scores, advance your Score Tracker as done during
the game. However, Score Track Rewards cannot be obtained with
the VPs earned after the game ends.
· If your score exceeds 50 VP, take a Score Token and
place it next to your Player Board with the 50 side
facing up. Reset your Score Tracker to the starting
point on the Score Track and continue tracking your
score. If your score exceeds 100 VPs, flip your Score
Token to show the 100 side face-up, indicating 100 VPs.
If your score exceeds 150 VPs, take a new Score Token
and place it next to your Player Board with the 50 side
facing up.
NOTE When calculating scores, think of it as adding up all the VPs
indicated on the Red Seal Markings you’ve collected during the game. The
Brown Seal Markings, which immediately increase your score as soon as
they are acquired, do not apply.

20

Ending Scores
3. Ending Scores of all your completed Achievement Slots.

4. 3 VPs per Trophy.
5. 1 VP for every 4 resources and/or Butterfly Nets.
· Add up the remaining resources and Butterfly Nets and calculate
1 VP for every 4.

deciding the winner
After final calculations, the player with the highest score wins!
If there are multiple players with the same high score, the player
with more Trophies wins. If that does not determine a winner, the
player with the most remaining resources wins. If all is to no avail,
enjoy the victory together!

score calculation examples
Specific examples will be used to explain how to calculate the score. Let’s assume that you have built the following reserve at the end of the game.
The game ended with you having scored a 27 VPs during the game. With this in mind, let's calculate your final score.

e

a

g

c

h
b
d
f
1. End Card Scores in your reserve.

3. Ending Scores of all your completed Achievement Slots.

You have collected 1 End Card b . The End Card rewards 1 VP
per ALL Crustacean in your reserve. You have collected 8 total
Crustaceans, 5 Crustacean Icons from Creature Cards and 2
Unhatched Crustacean Eggs and 1 hatched Crustacean Egg.
Therefore, you score 8 VPs, moving the Score Tracker to a 27 +
8 = 35 VP position. Once the game ends, you do not gain the
Rewards on the Score Track during score calculations.

You have completed a total of 5 Achievements, with VPs earned
from each Achievement being 15 VPs, 12 VPs, 6 VPs, 12 VPs, and
6 VPs e . Making the total, 51 VPs earned through
Achievements, and the current final score at 60 + 51 = 111 VPs.
Since your score exceeds 100, the 50 VPs Score Token is flipped
over to display 100 VPs f , and the Score Tracker is placed on
the 11 VPs standing on the Score Track.

2. Ending Scores of all Creature Cards in your reserve.

4. 3 VPs per Trophy.

Add all the Ending Scores c of all 14 cards you have collected.
The total sum of the 14 cards' Ending Score is 25 VPs. Making
the total current score 35 + 25 = 60 VPs. Since you have
exceeded 50 VPs, take a Score Token marked 50 VPs d and
place your Score Tracker on the 10-VPs standing on the Score
Track.

You collected a total of 5 Trophies g . Each Trophy is awarded 3
VPs. Therefore, you collect a total of 15 VPs for the Trophies. This
makes the current final score 111 + 15 = 126 VPs. Advance your
Score Tracker to 26.
5. 1 VP for every 4 resources and/or Butterfly Nets.

At the end of the game, you were left with a total of 6 resources:
2 Fruits and 4 Corals h , and no Butterfly Nets. Since the player
is awarded 1 VP for every 4, you collect 1 VP, making the final
score 126 + 1 = 127 VPs. Advance your Score Tracker to 27 and
compare your score with other players to determine the winner.

21

vii. solo mode
Set out and explore the mysterious island, full of wondrous creatures, on your own.
But wait! Tingent, deployed by the Society of the Western Kingdoms is here for the
same challenge. If you successfully accomplish the challenge, slowly move up to face
a more powerful Tingent and face even more threatening challenges!

game setup changes

5

In Solo Mode, you will face "Tingent", an AI opponent. Tingent does
not require the use of a Player Board, Captain Board, Butterfly Net,
Lock Token, or resources.
Additionally, Tingent will not receive Creature Cards at the start of
the game. Set up the game for 2 players, except:

6 Choose a color for Tingent to use and take the components that

1

Place 8 Trophies on the Main Board, instead of 10.

match the selected color and set up as directed below.

d Take 2 Crew members (1 magnet, 1 regular) and place them

2

Select your Captain Board among all the Captain Boards.

e

3

Decide the difficulty level of Tingent you would like to challenge,
take the corresponding difficulty level Tingent Board, and place
it nearby.

f

Lazy
Tingent

TITLE

Easygoing
Tingent

Wild
Tingent

Place a Turquoise Tingent's Target Token on the left-most
Single-Species Achievement Card a , a Yellow Target Token on
the left-most Multi-Species Achievement Card b , and the
Brown on the left-most Main Achievement Card c .

Terrifying
Tingent

next to the Tingent Board.
Take 6 Achievement Markers and place them next to the
Tingent Board.
Take 1 Resource Tracker and place it on the Tingent Board's
first space. In Solo Mode, this Resource Tracker becomes
the Tingent Tracker.

g Take 1 Score Tracker and place it on the boat icon near the
Score Track.

DIFFICULTY
NOTE The Tingent Boards are located on the backs of each
Captain Board. There are two of each identical Tingent Boards;
therefore, regardless of which Captain Board you choose, you'll be
able to enjoy Tingent Boards of all levels.

4

Shuffle all Tingent Cards and place them face-down next to the
chosen Tingent Board.

7

Combine the Crew member with the magnet on its back with the
Tingent meeple.
NOTE If you choose to use Tingent as your Captain and the
Tingent meeple is used as your Captain, substitute any other
Captain Meeple to represent the AI opponent.

You become the First Player and start the game!

7
d

g

6
1

e
f

5
4
c

a

22

b

3

goal of the solo mode

tingent actions

Your objective is to complete with a higher score than Tingent at the
end of the game.

You and Tingent take turns until the end of the game.
On Tingent's turn, Tingent acts in the following order:

the ai opponent, tingent

d
b

To play Solo Mode, you must first be familiar with the basic rules of
Wondrous Creatures as you must follow the overall outlining rules.
However, the AI Counterpart, Tingent, behaves in a special way.
· Tingent does not acquire or hold resources. Similarly, Tingent
does not acquire or use Nets or Energies.
· Tingent does not pay costs to play Creature Cards.
· Tingent does not activate Creature Card abilities. Creature Cards
collected by Tingent are only used to calculate VPs at the end of
the game.
· Tingent only uses 2 Crew members, not 3. These 2 Crew members
do not leave the Map during the game.
· Tingent collects Eggs from the Map but is not awarded Egg
Storage Rewards during the game.
· If Tingent uses Eggs to complete its Achievements, these Eggs
do not need to be hatched.
· Tingent can hold more than 12 Eggs at a time.
· Tingent does not receive rewards from the Score Track.

a
f

e

c

Tingent Card

1

h

Tingent Board

Draw a Tingent Card: Draw a card from the Tingent Card deck
and place it face-up on top of the previously drawn card.
NOTE If no Tingent Cards are left when a card needs to be
drawn, reshuffle the cards and create a fresh Tingent Card deck.

2

Activate the Tingent Card: Depending on the location of the
Tingent Tracker, activate either the yellow or brown space on
the Tingent Card.

· If the Tingent Tracker a is on a Yellow Gear space b on the
Tingent Board, activate the card's Yellow Area d .
· If the Tingent Tracker a is on a Brown Gear space c on the
Tingent Board, activate the card's Brown Area e .
NOTE For more on the card's icons, please refer to the next page.

3 Move the Tingent Tracker: If there is a Red Gear icon f in the
center of the Tingent Card, move the Tingent Tracker on the
Tingent Board to the next space.
· If there is an icon on the advanced space, the effect of the Track
Icon is taken immediately (see more on page 25).
· Once the tracker lands on the first Brown Gear space h of
the Tingent Board, immediately shuffle all Tingent Cards and
flip them brown-side up g . Starting from the following turn,
when the Tingent Cards are drawn, activate the Brown Area
of the cards, not the yellow.

g

23

tingent card icons

Regular Crew member Placement

Captain Placement
Place Tingent's Captain on the Map
where it can be adjacent to the most
amount of Habitats depicted on the
Tingent Card. Additionally, Tingent immediately gains 1 VP per adjacent
CORRESPONDING Habitat to its Captain.
E.g., if the icon above is activated, place the Tingent’s Captain
on a where it can be adjacent to the most Fruit Habitats
among the spaces the Tingent’s Captain can be placed on the
Map. Additionally, being placed adjacent to a total of 2 adjacent
Fruit Habitats, Tingent immediately scores 2 VPs.
NOTE
Tingent does not
collect 1 VP for all
adjacent Habitats.
Tingent collects
1 VP for each
adjacent Habitat
that was indicated
on the card.

a

Tingent Crew Placement Rules
· Tingent's Crew members follow the same Placement Rules
as the player's Crew members(see page 10), except that
Tingent’s Crew members cannot be placed on the Mountain.
· If there is an Egg on the hex Tingent's Crew member is
placed, Tingent also obtains the Egg. The Egg is placed
next to the Tingent Board.
· If Tingent cannot move, draw a new Tingent Card and
proceed with the abilities of the newly drawn card.
· If there are multiple locations where Tingent can be
adjacent to the most amount of Habitats depicted:
· Step 1. Place where it is also adjacent to more Habitats
besides the one indicated on the Tingent Card.
· Step 2. If that proves the same results, of those choices,
place where it is adjacent to more Special Effect Icons.
· Step 3. If that also proves the same results, of those
choices, place where it is adjacent to more Eggs.

Place Tingent's regular Crew member on
the Map where it can be adjacent to the
most amount of Habitats depicted on
the Tingent Card. The same placement
rules as Captain placement rules apply.

Draw 1 card (Face-down)
Draw 1 card from the Creature Card Deck and
place it FACE-DOWN in the Tingent Area. At the
end of the game, Tingent earns VPs based on the
number of these face-down cards collected.

Take 1 card from the Wilderness (Face-up)
Take a card with the same species icon as the
Achievement with a Target Token in the
corresponding color. Then, place it FACE-UP in
the Tingent Area.
· If multiple cards in the Wilderness meet these conditions, the card
with the highest Ending Score is taken. If there are multiple cards
with the same high score, the leftmost card is taken.
· If there are no cards that meet the conditions, Tingent draws 1 card
from the Creature Card Deck and places it FACE-DOWN.
Obtain an Egg

=

From the Supply, take an Egg of the same species as
the card obtained by Tingent and place it Unhatched
side up in the Tingent area.

E.g., you activate Tingent Card b . The Achievement Card
with a yellow Target Token displays a Bird and a Reptile Icon.
Currently, there are multiple cards with these species icons in
the Wilderness. Therefore, select the one with the highest
Ending Score c and place it FACE-UP in the Tingent Area.
Then, take an Egg of the same species as the card Tingent just
acquired (in this case, a bird Egg) from the Supply and place it
Unhatched side up in the Tingent Area.

b

NOTE Placement on a hex with an Egg is also
considered as being "adjacent" to an Egg.

· Step 4. If this proves the same results, of those choices,
place it where you would like.
E.g., Tingent’s Captain needs to be placed adjacent to the
most Coral Habitats on the Map and there are multiple places
where Tingent can be adjacent to the most Coral.

>
24

>

2

1

c

3

NOTE In rare cases, if the obtained card has 2 different species
icons, of the 2, obtain the Egg of the species icon indicated on the
Achievement Card with the Target Token.

tingent track icons
Discovery
Draw one tile from the Habitat Tile Stack and place
it on the leftmost Lake hex that has an Egg. Tingent
acquires the Egg in this hex, so place the acquired
Egg Unhatched side-up in the Tingent Area.
· If there is more than one leftmost Lake hex with an Egg, of those
hexes, place it on the topmost Lake hex.
· If there is no Lake hex with an Egg, place the Habitat Tile on the
topmost Lake hex located on the leftmost side.

Advance on the Time Track
Advance on the Time Track by one space. The effect of
the Time Track Icon is taken immediately.
· Tingent does not gain a Butterfly Net or ever remove
its Crew members from the Map.

Complete a Main Achievement
1 Place Tingent’s Achievement Marker in the upper

slot of the Main Achievement Card the Target
Token is placed on. If you already accomplished
the upper slot, Tingent accomplishes the lower slot.

2 Once accomplished, take a Trophy and place it in Tingent's area.
3 Move the Target Token to the next Main Achievement Card to

the right. If there are no more Main Achievements left on the
Map, the Target Token remains in that space.

Complete a Single/Multi-Species Achievement
Accomplish
Multi-Species
Achievement

Accomplish
Single-Species
Achievement

1 Following Tingent Achievement Marker Placement Rules, place
Tingent’s Achievement Marker on the Achievement Card with the
same color Target Token.

Tingent Achievement Marker Placement Rules
Tingent is always able to unconditionally accomplish the lower
slots on the Achievement Cards unless you occupy the lower
slots in advance. However, Tingent accomplishes the upper
slots when adding up the icons from the face-up cards and
Eggs collected by Tingent exceeds the lower slot requirement.

a

b

More than 3
Equal to or
less than 3

E.g, if there are more than 3 Fish icons from the face-up cards
and Eggs in Tingent's area, Tingent accomplishes the upper
slot a . If not, Tingent accomplishes the lower slot b .
NOTE Tingent never hatches Eggs.

· If you already completed the upper slot of the Achievement,
Tingent can only accomplish the lower slot.
E.g, Tingent has collected 4 Bird
icons from its face-up cards and
Eggs and is able to achieve the
upper slot. However, as you(Blue)
have already occupied the slot,
Tingent places its Achievement
Marker(Red) in the lower slot.
· If you already completed the lower slot of the Achievement,
and if Tingent cannot achieve the upper slot, Tingent will
choose not to complete this Achievement.
E.g, Tingent doesn’t have any Fish
icons from its face-up cards or
Eggs, and can only accomplish the
lower slot. However, Tingent is
unable to place its marker in that
spot as you(Blue) have already
completed the lower slot. Since there is no available slot for
Tingent, Tingent then forfeits from this Achievement.

2 Once accomplished, take a Trophy and place it in Tingent's area.
3 Move the Target Token to another Achievement Card of the same
type. If there are no other Achievement Cards of the same type
left on the Map, the Target Token remains in that space.

end of the game conditions
As with multiplayer games, the game ends when you and Tingent
have depleted all of the Trophies.
· If you are the last to deplete the Trophies, Tingent gets to take its
last turn, then the game ends.
· If Tingent depletes the last Trophy, the game ends immediately
thereafter.

score calculations
Once the game concludes, you calculate your score the same way as a
multiplayer game. Tingent's score is calculated in the following order.
1. Tingent does not activate the End Card to gain VPs.
Instead, face-up End Cards score 5 VPs per card.
2. Ending Scores of all face-up cards in Tingent Area.
3. Ending Scores of Tingent’s completed Achievement slots.
4. 3 VPs per Trophy.
5. 1 VP per Egg collected.
6. Depending on the difficulty played, gain VPs for each face-down
card collected.
· Lazy Tigent: 1 VPs
· Easygoing Tingent: 2 VPs
· Wild/Terrifying Tingent: 3 VPs

deciding the winner
After final calculations, the player with the highest score wins.
In the event of a tie, the side with more Trophies wins.
If this results in another tie, Tingent wins.

25

[optional] scenario modules
If you wish, you can apply a scenario module to the basic solo mode
for a more stimulating challenge. There are a total of 3 scenarios, and
each scenario has its own additional rules and/or restrictions to
provide varying levels of enjoyment. There are multiple difficulty
options for each scenario, so create your unique challenge by
combining Tingent's and the scenario's difficulty level to your liking.
NOTE If the combined difficulty level exceeds 5 stars, it can be quite
the challenge so beware!

#1. A Poor Adventurer's Challenge
Unfortunately, you have not been able to locate a sponsor in
time and do not have the luxuries of resources to facilitate your
expedition. You'll have to fill up on any missing resources upon
arriving at the island.

GAME SETUP CHANGES
Easy +
Set back all your Resource Tracks to 0 and take 3 Butterfly
Nets instead of 1. Instead of drawing 8 Creature Cards and
choosing 4, draw 6 from the deck, and keep all cards drawn.

Medium +
Set back all your Resource Tracks to 0. Following the default
setup, take 1 Butterfly Net. Instead of drawing 8 Creature Cards
and choosing 4, draw 5 from the deck and keep all cards drawn.

Hard +
Set back all your Resource Tracks to 0 and take no Butterfly
Nets. Instead of drawing 8 Creature Cards and choosing 4,
draw 4 and keep all cards drawn.

#2. Outlaws
The Tingent you'll face today is a menacing thing who will not
follow exploration manners. Your Crew may repeatedly be kicked
off the island due to the opponent's threatening actions.

RULE CHANGES
Easy +
When Tingent places a Crew member, it ignores the placement
of your Crew members. In other words, Tingent's Crew is always
placed on hexes with the most targeted Habitat adjacent to it. If
this results in your Crew member and Tingent's Crew member
being placed in the same hex, your Crew member is kicked off
the Map and returned to the Player Board. The returned Crew
member can freely be reused during your turn.

Medium +
Rule changes specified for the "Easy" difficulty apply.
Additionally, when your Crew member is kicked off the Map by
Tingent, Tingent draws 1 card from the deck and places it
FACE-DOWN in the Tingent Area.

26

#3. Suspicious Haze
Tingent, feeling threatened by your outstanding skills, has
cowardly deployed a smokescreen operation! Through this
thick haze, it seems LESS likely you'll encounter the creatures
you hoped to meet.

RULE CHANGES
Easy +
· When Tingent is to take a Creature Card from the
Wilderness, it acquires the card with the highest score,
regardless of the Achievement it is aiming for. If multiple
cards tie for the highest score, among these cards, Tingent
takes the leftmost card.
· After Tingent acquires a card, instead of placing a card
face-up to refill the Wilderness, place a card face-down to
refill the Wilderness. Carrying on, no more face-up cards
can be placed in the spaces that are refilled with face-down
cards and you are unable to acquire these face-down cards.
· When it gets to 4 face-down cards in the Wilderness,
immediately flip them all face-up and increase Tingent's
score by 4 VPs.
· The function of the "Sweep" icon is modified as
follows: Instead of discarding cards on the 3
rightmost or leftmost slots, flip up to 3 face-down
cards to be face-up in the Wilderness.
· The function of the “Full Sweep” icon on the
Time Track is modified as follows: Discard all
face-up cards in the Wilderness and refill from
the deck. The face-down cards are not affected.

Medium +
Rule changes specified for the "Easy" difficulty apply.
Additionally, the following rule changes also apply.
· Before the game begins, flip 2 left-most cards face-down
in the Wilderness.
· When there are 4 face-down cards in the Wilderness, all
these cards flip face-up, and unlike the 4 VPs gained in
Easy difficulty, Tingent gains 7 VPs.

Hard +
Rule changes specified for the "Easy" difficulty apply.
Additionally, the following rule changes also apply.
· Before the game begins, flip 2 left-most cards face-down
in the Wilderness.
· When there are 4 face-down cards in the Wilderness, all
these cards flip face-up, and unlike the 4 VPs gained in
Easy difficulty, Tingent gains 10 VPs.

viii. appendix
There is no need to read all the additional information in the appendix before
starting the game. Refer to the appendix when you come across unfamiliar
content during gameplay. If conflicts arise between the rulebook and the
information on Creature Cards/Captain Boards, always prioritize the information
on the Creature Cards/Captain Boards.

captain boards
All descriptions of abilities below assume that you have completed at least
one Achievement, unlocking the Captain ability. If the Captain ability has
yet to be unlocked, you cannot use the Captain abilities.

1. Cabot, Laid-back Wanderer
· When placing Cabot on the Map, activate 1 Recharge Card in your
reserve immediately.
· If you have no Recharge Cards in your reserve, placing Cabot will
result in no effect.

· Playing a card through Haoa’s ability is part of its effect, so it does not
consume an Action.
· If there are no cards in hand, or if you do not have sufficient
resources to play a card, no effects occur with this ability.

4. Helena, Mountain Herbalist
· When unlocking Helena's ability, you immediately gain 1 Net.
· You can hold up to 3 Nets at once. If acquiring a Net would exceed this
limit, you do not gain the Net and instead gain 1 VP.
· When placing Helena on the Mountain(s), no costs need to be paid.

2. Freya, Egg Nurturer
· When placing Freya on the Map, choose one of the following two
abilities to apply:
1) Obtain any 1 Egg that is adjacent to Freya, place it face-up in your
Egg Storage and receive the corresponding Egg Storage reward.
2) Flip up to 2 Eggs in your reserve. You cannot flip the same Egg twice.
· If there are no Eggs adjacent to Freya and no Eggs in your Egg
Storage, placing Freya will result in no effect.
· Even after unlocking the Captain ability, you have the option not to
use the Captain's ability when placing the Captain.

5. Macus, the Viewfinder
· When placing Macus on the Map, immediately activate the ability
of the adjacent Special Effect Icon that Macus is facing.
· Even if there is a Special Effect Icon in the direction Macus is facing,
if it is not adjacent, you cannot activate the Special Effect Icon.

3. Haoa, Benevolent Creature Guardian
· When placing Haoa on the Map, you can immediately play 1 card
from your hand by paying its cost.
· The Captain ability can be activated at any time during your turn when
using the “Place a Crew Member” Action. In other words, you can
activate Haoa's ability first and then obtain resources or cards from
adjacent Habitats, OR you can choose to obtain the resources or cards
from the adjacent Habitats then activate Haoa's ability.
· Hence, after placing Haoa and obtaining resources or cards from
adjacent Habitats, you can use Haoa's ability to immediately play a card
acquired during this turn.

E.g., you placed Haoa and obtained 1
Fruit, 1 Coral, and 1 Fruit Habitat Card,
Bearmour. Through Haoa’s ability, you
immediately play Bearmour to your
reserve by paying its cost of 2 Fruits.

E.g., you've placed Macus as shown. Immediately activate the
adjacent Special Effect Icon that is in the direction Macus is
facing. Through the Special Effect, Sweep and take a card from
the Wilderness.
· If there are no adjacent Special Effect Icons in the direction Macus
is facing, no effects occur with this ability.
· The Special Effect Icon activated through Macus’ ability can be
activated again using a Butterfly Net on the same turn.
NOTE When using Nets, only 1 Special Effect Icon can be activated
ONCE PER TURN. However, if you activate a Special Effect Icon without
a Net, you can activate the same Special Effect Icon multiple times in a
turn.

27

6. Marie, Bountiful Entrepreneur
· When placing Marie on the Map, choose 1 of the three Habitat Tiles in
the Habitat Tile Pool and activate its Special Effect Icon.

a

E.g., when Marie is placed, the
Habitat Tile Pool is as exampled on the
left. You opt for Special Effect a and
activate it, resulting in the activation
of 1 Recharge Card from your reserve.

· If, during the same turn, the Habitat Tile that was activated through
Marie's ability is placed adjacent to any of your Crew members on the
Map as a reward from the Score Track, you are still able to use a Net to
activate the Special Effect Icon of that Habitat Tile again.

gain an additional Coral. In total, Samuel's ability allowed you to
acquire 2 Corals.

9. Tingent, Energetic Robot
· When Tingent's ability is unlocked, immediately take 1 Energy from the
Supply and place it on its Captain Board.
· When placing Tingent on the Map, choose one of the following two
abilities to apply:
1) Place one Energy on the Tingent Captain Board.
· There is no limit to the number of Energies that can be placed
this way.
· You CANNOT restore the Energies on the Captain
Board through card abilities or Achievement Marker
Rewards.
NOTE You can only restore Energy Cards.

7. Octavia, Island’s Outlaw
· When placing Octavia on the Map, choose one card from your hand
to discard and gain 2 of the discarded card's Habitat Resource.
· If there are no cards in your hand, no effects occur with this ability.
· The Captain ability can be activated at any time during your
turn when using the “Place a Crew Member” Action. In other words,
you can activate Octavia's ability first and then obtain resources or cards
from adjacent Habitats, OR you can choose to obtain the resources or
cards from the adjacent Habitats and then activate Octavia's ability.
· Hence, after placing Octavia and obtaining resources or cards from
adjacent Habitats, you can use Octavia's ability to immediately
discard the acquired card this turn.

2) Distribute the Energies on the Tingent Captain Board to the Energy
Cards in your reserve as desired. However, you cannot exceed the
Energy Limit of each Energy Card. After dispersing them, any remaining
Energies are placed back on the Tingent Captain Board.
E.g., Tingent has been placed on the Map and its ability
activated. There are a total of 4 Energies on the Tingent Captain
Board, and you intend to distribute these 4 Energies to your
Energy Cards. You place 1 Energy on Energy Card a in your
reserve, 1 on card b , and 2 on card c .
Since the Energy Limit for Energy Card a is 1 d , you
cannot place more than 1 Energy on Energy Card a .

eucalord

E.g., you've placed Octavia as shown and obtained 1 Fruit, 1 Coral,
and 1 Fruit Habitat Card, Eucalord. Through Octavia's ability, you
discard the Eucalord from your hand to the discard pile and
obtain 2 Fruits which are the Habitat Resource of Eucalord.

d
8. Samuel, Veteran Explorer
· When placing Samuel on the Map, gain 1 resource among Fruits, Corals,
Flowers, and Mushrooms that you possess the least of. Then, you gain
an additional unit of the same resource for every 3 Trophies you have.
· If you have more than one type of resource that you possess the
least of, of those, choose the resource you’d like to gain.
· The Captain's ability can be activated at any time during your turn
when using the “Place a Crew Member” Action. Therefore, after placing
Samuel, you can acquire resources or cards from adjacent Habitats and
then activate Samuel's ability, OR, you can activate Samuel's ability first
and then acquire resources or cards from adjacent Habitats.
E.g., when Samuel is placed, you have 1 Fruit, 1 Coral, 2 Flowers,
3 Mushrooms, and 4 Trophies in your possession. From the
resources you possess the least of, which are Fruit and Coral,
you select Coral and gain 1 Coral. Since you have 4 Trophies, you

28

a

b

c

creature cards
001. Applet: Gain 2 VPs for each Fruit Habitat Icon in your reserve,
including this card. You can gain a maximum of 10 VPs through one
activation of this card.
002. Backactooth: Refer to #001.
003. Bearmour: Choose any Fruit Habitat with a Special Effect Icon on
the Map and activate the corresponding Special Effect Icon. If any of your
Crew members is adjacent to the same Habitat you activated with this
card, you can use the Butterfly Net to activate the same Special Effect
Icon once more in the same turn.

004. Cavigator: You can play this card for 1 resource less per Mushroom
Habitat Icon in your reserve and immediately obtain 3 VPs. E.g., if you had
3 Mushroom Habitat Icons in your reserve, you would only need to pay 1
Mushroom instead of 4 Mushrooms to play this card into your reserve.
Note that for this resource discount, only consider the Mushroom Habitat
Icons in the reserve before playing this card; therefore, the Mushroom
Habitat Icon on this card is not counted.
If the discount exceeds the card’s cost, the remaining balance is null.
005. Curechino: Refer to #003.
006. Doground: When you perform a Recharge Action, draw 1 card from
the deck. Check the Habitat Icon of the drawn card and count the
matching Habitat Icons in your reserve to gain 1 VP for each matching
Habitat Icon in your reserve, up to a maximum of 5 VPs.
007. Edenborn: Gain 1 VP for each Habitat Icon with the highest count in
your reserve. If you have two or more Habitat Icons tied for the highest
count, of those, select 1 Habitat Icon to apply the ability. E.g., if you have
6 Fruit Habitat Icons, 3 Coral Habitat Icons, 4 Flower Habitat Icons, and 5
Mushroom Habitat Icons, gain 6 VPs. If the Habitat Icon with the highest
count is Mushrooms, also count the Mushroom Habitat Icon on this card.
008. Goatitan: Refer to #003.
009. Pangshroam: Refer to #001.
010. Pharabog: Whenever you play a card with a combined cost of 4 or
more resources (Fruits, Corals, Flowers, and Mushrooms), immediately gain
2 VPs. Even if you play a card at a cost lower than its original value due to
the discount or other abilities, as long as the card's initial cost is 4 or
more, you gain 2 VPs. Since Pharabog's cost is also 4 or more resources,
playing Pharabog and applying its ability immediately grants you 2VPs.
011. Pinkroak: When you perform a Recharge Action, gain 2 resources
matching the Habitat Icon with the highest count in your reserve. If you
have two or more Habitat Icons tied for the highest count, of those, select
1 Habitat Icon and gain 2 resources matching the chosen Icon.
012. Sandraco: Refer to #004.
013. Sealocanth: Refer to #003.
014. Shellmit: Refer to #001.
015. Sunarrow: At the end of the game, gain 1 VP for any Crustacean icon
in your reserve. Count all Crustacean icons on the cards in your reserve,
and both Unhatched and Hatched Crustacean Eggs in your Egg Storage.
016. Verieberree: Refer to #004.
017. Watereo: Refer to #004.
018. Cryodon: When you perform a Recharge Action, gain 1 Coral.
Additionally, receive 1 additional Coral for every 3 Trophies you possess.
E.g., if you have 4 Trophies, you would gain a total of 2 Corals.
019. Crystalama: Each time you obtain a Trophy, activate 1 Recharge Card
in your reserve immediately. If there are no Recharge Cards in your
reserve, no effect occurs.
020. Dracougar: Refer to #015.
021. Elepharm: When this card is played, immediately take 2 Energies from
the Supply and place them on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card to
gain a resource of your choice. Additionally, exchange one type of resource
for another of a different type, selecting the amount you desire. It is not
mandatory to exchange the resource obtained through this card's effect.
E.g., you spent an Energy to acquire 1 Flower. You also choose to exchange
3 out of 5 Fruits for 3 Corals, losing 3 Fruits and gaining 1 Flower and 3
Corals through this card's effect.
022. Eucalord: When you perform a Recharge Action, gain 1 resource
among Fruits, Corals, Flowers, and Mushrooms that you possess the least
of. Then, you gain an additional unit of the same resource for every 3
Trophies you have. If you have more than one type of resource that you
possess the least of, of those, choose the resource you’d like to gain. E.g.,
when you perform a Recharge Action, you have 0 Fruits, 0 Corals, 1
Flower, 1 Mushroom, and 4 Trophies. You select Coral as the least
possessed resource and gain 1 Coral. Furthermore, you receive an
additional Coral for every 3 trophies, resulting in a total of 2 Corals gained
through this card.

023. Globeon: When this card is played, immediately take 1 Energy from
the Supply and place it on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card to
play one Recharge Card from your hand to your reserve without paying its
cost. Playing a Recharge Card is the result of using the Energy, so it does
not consume an Action.
024. Hamstore: Refer to #018.
025. Magape: Refer to #018.
026. Mammothog: Immediately activate 1 Recharge Card from your
reserve. Also, gain an Egg from the Supply that matches the species icon
of the activated Recharge Card.
027. Mommhog: Refer to #026.
028. Nutabi: When this card is played, immediately take 2 Energies from
the Supply and place them on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card to
gain a resource of your choice. Then, you gain an additional unit of the
same resource for every 3 Trophies you have.
029. Pheoxi: When this card is played, immediately take 2 Energies from
the Supply and place them on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card to
choose a Recharge Card from your reserve to activate.
030. Sugarider: Select 2 different Recharge Cards from your reserve and
activate each one once. You cannot activate the same Recharge Card twice.
If you only have one Recharge Card in your reserve, activate it once.
031. Thunderilla: Each time you gain a Trophy, gain 2 VPs immediately.
032. Triumpithon: Refer to #018.
033. Vikey: Each time your Recharge Card is activated through Recharge
Actions, card abilities, Special Effect Icons, Captain abilities, etc., gain 1 VP.
E.g., if all three of your Recharge Cards in your reserve are activated
through a Recharge Action, you gain 3 VPs through this card.
034. Wayfinder: When you perform a Recharge Action, gain 1 of the
resource you possess the least among the four types. Additionally, gain
VPs equal to the quantity of that resource type in your possession. If you
happen to have a tie for the lowest resource, of those, select the resource
you prefer to gain. E.g., when you perform a Recharge Action, you have 2
Fruits, 2 Corals, 3 Flowers, and 3 Mushrooms. You choose Corals as your
least possessed resource and gain 1 Coral, making your total 3 Corals in
your possession, totaling 3 VPs gained through this card.
035. Arbokueen: Choose 1 card from the Wilderness, pay the required
costs, and play it directly to your reserve. Playing a card from the
Wilderness through Arbokueen is part of its effect, so it does not consume
an Action.
036. Arboqing: Refer to #035.
037. Florarzei: Choose 1 card from the Wilderness and add it to your hand.
Gain 2 Habitat Resources of the acquired card.
038. Floratzel: Refer to #037.
039. Gryffling: Choose 1 End Card from your reserve. Activate its
end-game effect and immediately gain those VPs, up to a maximum of 10
VPs. The End Card activated through Gryffling still triggers its effect at
the end of the game. E.g., if you activated Sunarrow(#15) through this
card, you immediately gain 10 VPs for the total of 10 Crustacean icons in
your reserve at the time of activation. Sunarrow(#15) is still triggered at
the end of the game.
040. Gryphocean: Refer to #039.
041. Hanguine: When this card is played, immediately take 1 Energy from
the Supply and place it on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card to
play 1 End Card from the Wilderness or from your hand to your reserve
without paying the cost. Playing a card is the result of using an Energy, so
it doesn't consume an Action.
042. Hawkwaka: When you perform a Recharge Action, you immediately
gain 1 VP for each End Card in your reserve. You can gain a maximum of 5
VPs through one activation of this card.
043. Jumperor: Declare a species of your choice, then acquire all cards from
the Wilderness that feature that species icon and add them to your hand.
Gain 1 VP for each acquired card. As long as the declared species icon is
present, also acquire cards featuring two or more different species icons.
044. Jumpress: Refer to #043.

29

045. Nighthief: Sweep. Then, choose 1 card from the Wilderness and add it
to your hand. (Sweep: see page 11.)
046. Nightogue: Refer to #045.
047. Owlean: Choose 1 card from the Wilderness and add it to your hand.
Gain 1 Egg matching the species icon of the acquired card. If the acquired
card has two different species icons, choose one of the desired species
and gain that Egg.
048. Owlite: Refer to #047.
049. Skyrant: Refer to #015.
050. Starbeak: Choose a card from the Wilderness and immediately play it
to your reserve without paying the cost. Playing a card from the
Wilderness through Starbeak is part of its effect, so it does not consume
an Action.
051. Swonder: When this card is played, immediately take 2 Energies from
the Supply and place them on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card to
choose a card from the Wilderness and add it to your hand.
052. Berrong: Use the ability of the last Instant Card played.
*Exceptions to the rule: This ability is on 2 different cards, Berrong and
Blizard (#53). If you play Berrong and Blizard (#53) in a row and Blizard
(#53) triggers Berrong, or vice versa, nothing happens as the ability of the
last Instant card played is simply repeated twice.
053. Blizard: Refer to #052.
054. Chactiva: Each time you gain a Trophy, gain 1 resource of your choice.
055. Frogain: Choose 1 Energy Card from your reserve to restore its
Energy to its full Energy Limit. You cannot restore Energies on the Captain
Board.
056. Frogave: Refer to #055.
057. Lilizard: Receive a 1-resource discount for the cost of the next card
you play. The Lilizard’s effect is only valid for this turn. If you do not play
another card after Lilizard in the same turn, the discount effect of Lilizard
will expire. If the discount exceeds the card’s cost, the remaining balance is
null.
058. Metaforma: Gain an Egg from the Supply in its Unhatched state with
the species icon matching the last played Instant Card's species icon.
059. Metamorpha: Refer to #058.
60. Mushmid: Choose 1 card from your hand with a combined cost of
Fruits, Corals, Flowers, and Mushrooms totaling 2 or less. Play the selected
card immediately to your reserve without paying the cost. Playing a card
through Mushmid is part of its effect, so it does not consume an Action.
When checking the cost of a card, consider the initial cost before applying
any discounts from card abilities. For example, with Cavigator (#004), since
its initial cost is 4 resources, it cannot be played using Mushmid.
061. Mushmidol: Refer to #060.
062. Nimfizard: Refer to #057.
063. Plataurora: When this card is played, immediately take 2 Energies
from the Supply and place them on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this
card to take an Egg of your choice from the Supply and place it on top of
this card, to add another species icon to this card. Moving forward, this
card is treated as having not only the Reptile Icon but also the added
Egg's species icon. When adding another species icon to this card, you
cannot add the same icon that the card already possesses. E.g., if you used
the first Energy to add the Crustacean species to this card, you cannot add
another Crustacean nor a Reptile using the second Energy. The Egg placed
on this card is purely for species representation and cannot be counted as
an Egg. You cannot hatch/flip the Eggs on this card. Additionally, when
completing Achievements using the species on this card, the Egg on the
card is not to be considered for hatching.
064. Platazul: Refer to #063.
065. Rewardino: Choose one of the Achievement Marker Rewards you have
already obtained to gain once again. If you haven't completed any
Achievements yet, you do not gain any effects.
066. Stridesert: Each time you play an Instant Card, immediately gain 1 VP.
067. Torterran: Refer to #015.
068. Aromalli: When you perform a Recharge Action, draw 1 card from the

30

deck and gain 1 Habitat Resource of the drawn card. E.g., if the drawn
card has a Fruit Habitat Icon, gain 1 Fruit.
069. Caprieel: When you perform a Recharge Action, draw 1 card from the
deck and gain an Egg matching the species icon of the drawn card in its
Unhatched Side from the Supply. If the drawn card has two different
species icons, choose one and gain that Egg.
070. Caregaroo: Draw 1 card from the deck and gain an Egg matching the
species icon of the drawn card from the Supply. If the drawn card has
two different species icons, choose one and gain that Egg.
071. Clairgaroo: Refer to #070.
072. Cucunet: Gain 1 Net from the Supply.
073. Deepus: Examine 3 cards from the deck, choose one to add to your
hand and place the remaining in the discard pile. Then, immediately gain
the score corresponding to the acquired card's Ending Score. If the added
card is an End Card, you "gain" 0 VPs, which is the card's Ending Score.
You do not gain the score provided by the card's abilities.
074. Drawanta: Draw 3 cards from the deck. Then, choose 1 card from
your hand and discard it. The discarded card doesn't have to be one of
the cards drawn through this card's effect.
075. Drawight: Refer to #074.
076. Fishorse: Each time you draw a card from the deck, gain 1 VP. E.g., if
you draw 3 cards from the deck using Drawanta(#074), you would gain 3
VPs through Fishorse. Note that Deepus(#073), Pondire (#82) and
Swampus (#084) do not trigger the effect of Fishorse as they do not
involve drawing cards.
077. Gluminor: Draw 1 card from the deck and immediately gain 1 VP for
each Creature Card currently in your hand, including the card you just
drew. You can gain a maximum of 10 VPs through one activation of this
card.
078. Kilphin: Draw 1 card from the deck. If you have 5 or more Creature
Cards in your hand, including the card you just drew, additionally gain 1
Net.
079. Kilpink: Refer to #078.
080. Lavarp:When you play this card, immediately take 2 Energies from
the Supply and place them on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card
to draw 1 card from the deck. Choose 2 out of 3 options among 1) an Egg
of the same species as the drawn card, 2) a Habitat Resource of the
drawn card, and 3) the same VPs as the Ending Score of the drawn card.
You cannot choose the same option twice. E.g., if Mernetid(#81) is drawn,
choose 2 out of 3 options among a Fish Egg, a Coral, and 4 VP to gain. If
the drawn card has two different species icons and you choose to acquire
an Egg, of those, select the type to gain. If the drawn card is an End Card
and you choose to acquire the same VPs as the Ending Score of the
drawn card, you "gain" 0 VPs, which is the card's Ending Score. You do not
gain the score provided by the card's abilities.
081. Mernetid: Gain 2 Nets from the Supply.
082. Pondire: When this card is played, immediately take 2 Energies from
the Supply and place them on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card
to examine 3 cards from the deck, choose one to add to your hand and
place the rest in the discard pile. Gain 1 Habitat Resource of the acquired
card.
083. Sharkhon: Refer to #015.
084. Swampus: Refer to #073.
085. Centom: When this card is played, immediately take 2 Energies from
the Supply and place them on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card
to flip up to 2 Eggs in your reserve and gain 2 VPs immediately. When
flipping 2 Eggs, you must flip 2 DIFFERENT Eggs. You cannot flip the
same Egg twice. You can flip 1 Unhatched Egg to its Hatched side and flip
another Hatched Egg to its Unhatched side. If you prefer, you can decide
not to flip any Eggs at all.
086. Cocoroch: Flip up to 2 Eggs in your reserve and gain 2 VPs for each
Egg flipped in this way. When flipping 2 Eggs, you must flip 2 DIFFERENT
Eggs. You cannot flip the same Egg twice. You can flip 1 Unhatched Egg
to its Hatched side and flip another Hatched Egg to its Unhatched side.

087. Finhead: Hatch 1 Egg in your reserve to gain 1 Egg of your choice
from the Supply. If there are no Unhatched Eggs to Hatch, no effect
occurs.
088. Flareetle: Refer to #087.
089. Gemantis: Refer to #015.
090. Glowyrm: Hatch up to 5 Eggs in your reserve and gain 2 VPs for
each Egg hatched in this way.
091. Hoflora: Hatch 1 Egg in your reserve to choose one type of resource
and gain 2 of that resource.
092. Hofume: Refer to #091.
093. Housilk: When you perform a Recharge Action, gain 1 resource of
your choice and flip up to 2 Eggs in your reserve. When flipping 2 Eggs,
you must flip 2 DIFFERENT Eggs. You cannot flip the same Egg twice. You
can flip 1 Unhatched Egg to its Hatched side and flip another Hatched
Egg to its Unhatched side. If you prefer, you can decide not to flip any
Eggs at all.
094. Lunantula: Each time, you flip Egg(s) from your reserve, gain 1 VP.
You only gain 1 VP, even if you flip multiple Eggs at once. E.g., if you
flip 2 Eggs through Housilk(#93), you gain 1 VP through Lunantula. Then,
on the same turn, if you hatch 1 more Egg through Hoflora(#091), you
gain an additional 1VP through Lunantula. Even if you complete an
Achievement and flip 8 Eggs simultaneously, you still just gain 1 VP
through Lunantula.
095. Magicadas: Obtain 1 Insect Egg from the Supply and add it to your
reserve in its Unhatched state.
096. Mentimidae: When you perform a Recharge Action, gain 1 VP for
every 2 Hatched Eggs in your reserve.
097. Rosaroch: Refer to #086.
098. Stellaling: Gain 1 VP each time you acquire an Egg. In the event you
need to gain an Egg when the Egg storage is full, you would gain 3 VPs
through Stellaling's effect instead 2VPs. (See more on page 14.) Note that
Plataurora(#063) and Platazul(#64) do not trigger the effect of Stellaling
as the Egg placed on Plataurora and Platazul is purely for species
representation and cannot be counted as an Egg.
099. Wallowyrm: Refer to #090.
100. Waspike: Obtain 1 Egg of your choice from the Supply and add it to
your reserve in its Unhatched state.
101. Wizadas: Refer to #095.
102. Behewant: Discard up to 2 cards from your hand. For each of the
cards discarded, immediately gain 2 VPs.
103. Blankin: Discard 1 card from your hand. Gain 1 VP for each species
icon in your reserve that matches the discarded card. Include both
Hatched and Unhatched Eggs in the count. If the discarded card displays
two different species icons, of those, select 1 species icon to apply the
ability. E.g., if you discard a card with the Bird icon, count all Bird icons
on the cards in your reserve, and both Unhatched and Hatched Bird Eggs
in your Egg Storage.
104. Cyaniu: Discard up to 5 cards from your hand. For each card
discarded this way, receive a 1-resource discount to play this card.
Additionally, immediately gain 5 VPs. E.g., if you discarded a total of 4
cards, you only need to pay 1 Coral or 1 Mushroom to play Cyaniu.
105. Doublagon: Discard 1 card from your hand to gain 2 Habitat
Resources of the discarded card.
106. Draksid: Gain 1 VP each time you discard a Creature Card from your
hand. E.g., if you discarded a total of 4 cards using the ability of Cyaniu
(#104), you gain 4 VPs through Draksid. When you perform a Recharge
Action and discard excess cards to meet the 5-card hand limit, Draksid’s
effect also applies. Note that Deepus(#073), Pondire (#82) and Swampus
(#084) do not trigger the effect of Draksid as they do not involve
discarding cards from your hand.
107. Duplagon: Refer to #105.
108. Fafkeen: When this card is played, immediately take an Energy from
the Supply and place it on this card. When your hand is empty, discard an
Energy from this card to draw 4 cards from the deck and gain their

Habitat Resources. Therefore, through Fafkeen's ability, you gain a total
of 4 cards and 4 resources. An Energy cannot be spent to activate this
ability if your hand is not empty.
109. Goldeniu: Refer to #104.
110. Healathan: Discard up to 3 cards from your hand and for each card
discarded this way, receive a 1-resource discount to play this card.
Additionally, gain 1 Net. E.g., if you discarded a total of 2 cards, you only
need to pay 1 Coral to play Healathan.
111. Newtyrant: Refer to #015.
112. Nidknight: Discard 1 card from your hand to gain 2 Eggs from the
Supply that match the species icon of the discarded card.
If the discarded card has two different species icons, choose one species,
and obtain 2 Eggs of that species.
113. Nidmight: Refer to #112.
114. Platinodon: Discard 1 card from your hand to choose 2 cards from the
Wilderness and add them to your hand.
115. Revivathan: Refer to #110.
116. Rockin: Refer to #103.
117. Throboros: When this card is played, immediately take an Energy from
the Supply and place it on this card. If a card with a cost of 3 resources or
less is about to be discarded, instead of discarding the card, discard an
Energy from this card to play the card to your reserve without paying its
cost. Playing a card is the result of using the Energy, so it does not
consume an Action. E.g., if you have 6 cards in your hand during your
Recharge Action, you need to discard 1 card to keep your hand limit at 5
cards. You decide to discard Rockin(#116), which costs 2 resources (1 Coral
+ 1 Mushroom=2). At this time you can decide to use Throboros’ Energy to
play Rockin(#116) without paying its cost, instead of discarding it. As
Rockin(#116) was played through an Energy, it does not consume any
Actions. When checking the cost of a card, consider the initial cost before
applying any discounts from card abilities. E.g., with Cavigator(#004),
since its initial cost is 4 resources, it cannot be played using Throboros.
118. Throiamet: Refer to #117.
119. Wyfin: When playing this card, immediately take 2 Energies from the
Supply and place them on this card. Discard 1 Energy from this card to
discard 1 card from your hand and gain 2 Habitat Resources of the
discarded card.
120. Bustosaur: At the end of the game, choose an End Card from your
reserve other than this card and gain the score provided by that card once
more. E.g., if you earned 12 VPs through Duckaiser(#121) at the end of the
game, you can select to gain the same score of Duckaiser(#121) once more
through this card.
121. Duckaiser: At the end of the game, gain 1 VP for each Instant Card in
your reserve. You can gain a maximum of 12 VPs through one activation of
this card.
122. Eggorgeous: At the end of the game, gain 1 VP for each Egg in your
reserve. Count both Hatched and Unhatched Eggs.
123. Solaroller: At the end of the game, gain 4 VPs for each full set (Fruit,
Coral, Flower, Mushroom) of Habitat Icons in your reserve. E.g., if your
reserve has 4 Fruit Habitat Icons, 3 Coral Habitat Icons, 5 Flower Habitat
Icons, and 6 Mushroom Habitat Icons, you can create 3 full sets of Habitat
Icons, and earn 3 sets x 4 VPs = 12 VPs. You can gain a maximum of 12
VPs through one activation of this card.
124. Swimmah: At the end of the game, receive 3 VPs for each Recharge
Card in your reserve. You can gain a maximum of 12 VPs through one
activation of this card.
125. Wolture: At the end of the game, count up all your Nets, Fruits,
Corals, Flowers and Mushrooms. Gain 1 VP for each Net and each resource.
You can gain a maximum of 12 VPs through one activation of this card.
E.g., if you had 3 Fruits, 1 Coral, 0 Flowers, and 3 Mushrooms, with 1 Net
left at the end of the game, you would gain 3+1+0+3+1=8 VPs.
126. Yormovent: At the end of the game, gain 3 VPs for each Energy Card
in your reserve. You can gain a maximum of 12 VPs through one activation
of this card.

31

main achievement cards

time/score track icons

You can complete this Achievement if you have 8 or more
Unhatched Eggs in your reserve. After accomplishing this
Achievement, hatch all 8 of the used Eggs.
You can complete this Achievement by collecting 6 or more
Creature Cards with the same Habitat Icon in your
reserve. E.g., if you collected 6 Creature Cards with Fruit
Habitat Icons, you can complete this Achievement.
You can complete this Achievement if you have 10 or more
of the same species icon in your reserve. For Eggs, only
those that are Unhatched count. If you use Eggs to
complete this Achievement, hatch the used Egg(s).

Gain a Discovery
Reward
(See page 11.)

Gain 1 Net from the
Supply.

You can complete this Achievement if you have 14 or
more Creature Cards played in your reserve.

Full Sweep: Discard all
cards in the Wilderness
and refill from the
deck.

Gain a Trophy
from the Main
Board.

special effect icons

Obtain
a Fruit.

Obtain
a Flower.

Obtain
a Coral.

Obtain a
Mushroom.

Immediately
gain 3 VPs.

You can complete this Achievement if you have 2 full sets
of each of the 5 different Card Types in your reserve.
(2 Continuous, 2 Energy, 2 Recharge, 2 Instant, and 2 End
Cards.)

achievement marker rewards

Sweep and take 1 card from the
Wilderness. (Sweep: see page 11.)

Obtain 1 random Egg from the
Egg Pouch.

Select 1 Egg from your reserve and
flip it. (Flip: See page 14.)

Draw 2 cards from the
Creature Card Deck.
(Draw: See page 10.)

Take 1 card from the Wilderness
and gain 1 Habitat Resource of
the card obtained.

Activate one Recharge Card in
your reserve. If there is no
Recharge Card in your reserve, no
effect occurs.

You can choose not to receive the rewards below and, instead,
immediately gain 2 VPs.
Gain 2 resources of any kind. You can choose to
receive 2 of the same resource type or 1 each of two
different resource types.

Take 2 cards from
the Wilderness.
(See page 10.)

Gain 1 Net from the
Supply.

Gain 3 VPs
immediately.
(See page 7.)

Select 1 Energy Card from your reserve and restore its
Energy to its full Energy Limit. If there are no Energy
Cards in your reserve, this reward has no effect. You
cannot restore Energies on the Captain Board.
Activate all Recharge Cards in your reserve in your
preferred order. If there are no Recharge Cards in
your reserve, this reward has no effect.

Discard 1 card from your hand into Flip up to 2 Eggs in your reserve.
(Flip: See page 14.)
the discard pile. Gain 2 Habitat
Resources of the discarded card. You cannot flip the same Egg twice
with this effect.
(Habitat Resource: See page 13.)

egg storage rewards
Take 1 card from the
Wilderness.
(See page 10.)
Gain any 1 resource.

32

x

Gain X VP immediately.
(See page 7.)

Choose 1 card from your hand and
pay its cost to play it to the reserve.
A card played this way is a part of
the Special Effect; therefore, it does
not consume an Action.

