The Mercury’s Boots expansion for                       begins with 10 blessings. Your hero’s
Hoplomachus: Victorum introduces an                     Opportunity Capacity, indicated by the
accelerated way to experience the epic,                     icon, starts at 3. Your hero’s starting
gladiatorial campaign, trimming the journey             Navigation Stat, indicated by the        icon,
to a maximum of 24 weeks and speeding                   is 1.
things up accordingly in a variety of ways. It
is recommended that players be familiar with          • Tactics. Follow the instructions for
the rules of Hoplomachus: Victorum before               Chosen/Valiant difficulty, taking the
attempting this way to play, as these rules build       three tactics listed for your hero.
off of that understanding.
                                                    Rival Setup
Components                                            • Scion Banes. Rather than placing the
                                                        scion’s bane(s) in the bane stack, place
  • 1 Hero Tracking Pad                                 them directly in the draw bag.
  • 1 Reference Sheet                                 • Primuses. Rather than selecting three
                                                        primuses, place all seven unused
                                                        primuses near the stadium seating in
Setup
                                                        easy reach. If playing with expansions
Carry out setup as normal with the following            (including using Remastered heroes as
changes to the indicated steps:                         primuses), use seven primuses total and
                                                        include no more than one primus from
                                                        each region.
Component Setup
Hero Tracking Pad. Use the new hero                   • Bag units. As normal, place the five
tracking pad included with this expansion.              remaining neutral units into the draw
                                                        bag. Then, place the first unit from each
                                                        faction stack into the draw bag.
Hero Setup
  • Difficulty Level. Do not choose a
    difficulty level.
  • Hero Prowess. Skip gaining hero
    prowess for the time being.
  • Hero Tracking Pad. Fill in your hero’s
    name, Movement, Range, Class, Health,
    Leadership, and Attack as normal. Skip
    all difficulty level adjustments. Your hero
New Setup Steps
  • Opportunities. Gain the top three cards
    from the Opportunity deck and place
    them face up in your camp.
  • Hero Ascension. You may spend any
    number of your blessings at this time.
    For each blessing spent, take one of the
    following rewards:
     ◊ Gain a hero stat upgrade (Health,
       Attack, Leadership, Navigation, or
       Opportunity Capacity).
     ◊ Gain a hero prowess.
     ◊ Recruit the front unit of any faction
       stack.
The Hero Ascension step is critical to your
success on this quickened journey. Your acts
are much shorter and the difficulty will rise
much faster, so you’ll need some amount of
strength when starting the game. However,
blessings still provide important protection
from failure, so spending too many is a risky
choice. Think carefully about your decisions
during this step!


Gameplay
The goal of Mercury’s Boots remains the same    See “Primuses” below for more details on this.
as Victorum: Grow strong and defeat the         Instead, you can end an act on any location,
scion lurking at Vesuvius before your time      and you simply move into the next act once
is up. A number of aspects of that journey,     you’ve finished the previous one.
however, have changed. These changes are
outlined below.                                 Scion influence gain is still tied to your current
                                                act, but difficulty modifiers within the game
The Structure of Play                           are not and are instead tied to the defeat of
You now have a maximum of 24 weeks to           primuses.
complete this journey, with each act taking 6
weeks instead of 12.                            As normal, you must wait until Act IV to face
                                                the scion, and you must face and defeat the
As an additional structural change, you no      scion before the end of Act IV in order to win
longer face primuses at the end of each act.    the game!
Navigation                                      You may move over capital locations. Only
Your Navigation Stat determines how many        finishing your Travel Phase on a capital
map spots you can travel during each Travel     location will trigger a primus/scion fight. You
Phase. This allows you to traverse the land     cannot land on a capital location if there is not
faster. It can be upgraded to a maximum of 4.   a primus/scion to fight there.


You must move at least one spot during the      You must land on a harbor in order to use it;
Travel Phase, but are not required to use       you cannot use a harbor mid-navigation.
your full Navigation. As normal, except at
the start of each act when you can move in      Opportunities
any direction, you cannot travel back along     When you accept an Opportunity event, draw
the path you most recently traveled. You        up to three cards from the Opportunity Deck,
also cannot move onto or through the same       ensuring you do not exceed your Opportunity
location twice in the same Travel Phase.        Capacity as indicated on your hero tracking
                                                pad. Your Opportunity Capacity can be
                                                upgraded to a maximum of 5.

                                                Keep all Opportunity cards in your camp
                                                face up. Ignore all text on the face of the
                                                card with the exception of the reward text.
                                                Opportunities can be used in two different,
                                                new ways in Mercury’s Boots. First, you may
                                                discard an Opportunity card during combat
                                                directly after the die roll of any non-scion unit
                                                – yours or a rival. This causes the entire roll
                                                to be re-rolled. You must accept the new roll
                                                (or spend another Opportunity for another
                                                re-roll). This re-roll happens before any skill
                                                or effect is triggered off of the die roll. Any die
                                                roll can be re-rolled including attacks, die rolls
                                                as part of skill resolution, or as part of an event
                                                resolution.

                                                Second, Opportunities can be spent when
                                                collecting primus rewards for the reward
                                                on the card. See “Primus Rewards” for more
                                                details.
Sport Events                                       Primus Lineup
When the tribune is defeated, your hero’s HP       The Primus Sheet dictates the lineups
is not reduced. Instead, you immediately gain      for each primus fight you take on. Use
scion influence equal to the current act.          the lineup shown in the first circle not
                                                   covered. Use the Health stat printed
When you win a Sport event, you are granted        on the primus chip for primuses. After
both rewards of recruiting a rival unit and        defeating a primus, place their chip on
gaining tactics, rather than only one of these     that circle. This acts as a reminder of how
rewards.                                           many primuses you have defeated, and an
                                                   easy indication of which lineup to use for
                                                   the next primus fight.
Bloodshed Events
Bloodshed events are carried out as normal.
When you win a Bloodshed event, increasing
your Navigation Stat or Opportunity Capacity
are new reward options you may choose,
in addition to the already existing upgrade
options. You still only get one reward in total.

Primuses
You may challenge any number of primuses,
up to all 7, during your journey.
Challenge a primus as normal,
by landing on a capital location
containing an undefeated
primus.

Defeating a primus grants
massive rewards which will help
your hero take a big step forward.
However, doing so also marks an
increase in difficulty for the rest of the
game. Be sure and look over the Primus
Sheet carefully to understand the risks and
rewards.

For events that require a random
unused primus, if you have
no unused primuses (from
Remastered or expansions), use
a random defeated primus. If none
are defeated, use a random undefeated
primus but return it with the other
undefeated primuses at the end of the event.
Primus Modifiers                                 Scion Combat
Each time you defeat a primus, you add a         In Mercury’s Boots, ignore the “Pluto’s
modifier which will apply to all combats for     Domain” section on the Vesuvians arena
the remainder of the game, including primus      reference which adds banes equal to the
combats, with the exception of the scion         number of Vesuvians left in the faction stack.
combat. Primus modifiers are cumulative.
If an event card instructs you to ignore act     Instead, gain 1 bane for each primus you have
modifiers, ignore primus modifiers for that      left undefeated.
event.

Primus Rewards
When you would gain your reward for
defeating a primus, see the Primus Sheet which
outlines your reward options. This replaces
the normal reward. You will receive four total
rewards each time you defeat a primus, with
several rewards offering two options. Working
down the list, select your four rewards.

Hero Stat Upgrade
The stats that can be upgraded match
those that can be upgraded in successful
Bloodshed events: Attack (add or upgrade
a die), Leadership, Health, Navigation, or
Opportunity Capacity.

   Opportunity Reward
   To collect an opportunity reward, discard
   any opportunity in your camp and collect
   the reward listed on it.

   Recruit a Rival
   You may recruit a rival unit in the same
   way as you would when resolving a Sport
   event reward, recruiting any non-elite
   rival unit from among the rival’s defeated
   units or those still in the arena from that
   combat.
