Rules Reference

Using this Document

Glossary

“I must go to this lords’ council and learn what I can.
But the Enemy has the move, and he is about to open
his full game.”

The following is an alphabetical list of entries for game
rules, terms, and situations that may occur during play.

—Gandalf, The Return of the King

An ability is the special game text that a card
contributes to the game. Card abilities fall into one of
the following types: action, forced, keyword, constant
ability, response, or when revealed ability.

This document is intended as the definitive source for
rules information, but does not teach players how to
play the game. Players should first read the Learn to
Play book in its entirety and use this Rules Reference
as needed while playing the game.
The majority of this guide consists of the glossary,
which provides an alphabetical listing of terms and
situations a player may encounter during a game. This
section should be the first destination for players who
have a rules question.
The latter part of this guide contains three appendices.
Appendix I provides timing diagrams that illustrate the
structure of an entire game round, and details on how
to handle each step. Appendix II provides a detailed
anatomy of each card type. And Appendix III describes
specifically how to play in Campaign Mode.
The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game has a rich
history that has featured numerous products, some
of which are no longer in print. All of those former
products are compatible with the contents of this
revised core set. Therefore, this document contains
material that covers all The Lord of the Rings LCG
products, even if the information included in the entry
is not relevant to the contents of this core set.

The Golden Rules
If the text of this Rules Reference directly contradicts
the text of the Learn to Play book, the text of this guide
takes precedence.
If the ability text of a card directly contradicts the text
of either the Rules Reference or the Learn to Play book,
the text of the card takes precedence.

The Grim Rule
If players are unable to find the answer to a rules or
timing conflict in this Rules Reference, resolve the
conflict in the manner that the players perceive to be
the worst possible resolution with regards to winning
the scenario.

Ability, Card Ability

◊ The initiation of an action or response ability is
optional. The word “may” also incorporates a
player option into the resolution of an ability. The
player who controls the card on which an optional
ability exists determines whether or not they wish
to use that ability at the appropriate time.
◊ The application or initiation of the following types
of abilities is mandatory: constant abilities, when
revealed abilities, and forced abilities.
◊ The initiation of any keyword which uses the word
“may” in its keyword description is optional. The
application of all other keywords is mandatory.
◊ Card abilities only interact with, and can only
target, cards that are in play, unless the ability
specifically refers to an out-of-play area or element.
Card abilities on characters and attachments can
only be initiated or affect the game from an in-play
area unless they specifically refer to being used
from an out-of-play area, or require that the card
be out of play for the ability to resolve. Event cards
implicitly interact with the game from an out-ofplay area, as established by the rules of the event
card type.
◊ A card ability can only be initiated if its effect
has the potential to change the game state. This
potential is assessed without taking into account
the consequences of the cost payment or any other
ability interactions.
◊ A card ability can only be initiated if its cost (after
modifiers) has the potential to be paid in full.
◊ When an ability has more than one sentence of
text, the ability should be resolved one sentence at
a time.
◊ An ability prefaced by a bold-face timing trigger
followed by a colon is referred to as a “triggered
ability.”

See also: Action, Effects, Response, Forced,
Keywords, Constant Ability

2

Action, Action Ability

Active Player

Some abilities are labeled by the word “Action”
followed by ability text. These abilities can only be
initiated by a player during an action window. For
details on when action windows occur during each
round, see Appendix I on page 20.

The phrase “active player” is used to refer to a player
who is obligated to perform (or granted the option to
perform) a specific game function during a framework
step or special action window.

Some action abilities have a phase name as a precursor
to the word “Action.” Such abilities are still considered
action abilities, with the restriction that they can
only be initiated during an action window in the
specified phase.
An action must be resolved as completely as possible
before the next action can be initiated.
A player may initiate an action ability from:
◊ A hero, ally, or attachment card that is in play and
under their control.
◊ An event card in their hand.
◊ An out-of-play card they own with an ability that
specifies that it triggers from an out-of-play state,
or requires the card to be out of play in order
to resolve.
◊ An objective, quest, or location ability in play with
the boldface “Action:” trigger.

See also: Ability, Triggered Ability, Appendix I

Active Location
When the players travel to a location, it is removed
from the staging area and placed next to the quest deck,
causing it to become the active location.
◊ There can only be one active location at a time.
The players cannot travel if another location card
is active.
◊ The active location does not contribute its threat
strength to the total threat strength in the staging
area.
◊ The active location acts as a buffer for the current
quest. Any progress tokens that would be placed on
the current quest are instead placed on the active
location, up to that location’s quest points.
◊ If the active location becomes explored by a
game or card effect that requires the placement of
multiple progress on the quest (and the progress
is instead being placed on the active location), the
remaining progress created by the effect is placed
on the current quest.

After
The word “after” refers to a game occurrence that
has just been concluded. Many response abilities
use the term “after” to specify the timing of their
triggering conditions.

See also: Response, Triggered Ability

Ally Cards
Ally cards represent characters (friends, followers,
creatures, and hirelings) that assist a player’s heroes on
the quest. Ally cards are played from a player’s hand,
and they remain in play until they are destroyed.

See also: Damage, Destroy, Hit Points, Appendix II

Attachment Cards
Attachment cards represent weapons, armor, artifacts,
equipment, skills, and conditions. When played, they
are attached to (placed slightly overlapped by) another
card or game element, and they tend to modify or
influence the activity of the card or game element to
which they are attached.
◊ An attachment cannot enter play if there is
no eligible card or game element to which it
can attach.
◊ There is no limit to the number of attachments that
can be attached to a card or game element.
◊ If the card to which an attachment is attached
leaves play, simultaneously discard the attachment.
◊ Play restrictions, such as “attach to a Gondor
hero” are checked only at the time the attachment
enters play.
◊ A player has the option to play attachments by
attaching them to another player’s character. When
an attachment enters play attached to a character
under another player’s control, that player gains
control of the attachment.
◊ An attachment card readies and exhausts
independently of the card to which it is attached.

See also: “Cannot have attachments,” Appendix II

See also: Explored, Travel

3

Attack Strength
Each character and enemy has an attack strength. This
value is the amount of damage that character or enemy
deals when it attacks.
◊ Attack strength is denoted by the Û symbol.

See also: Combat Phase

Attacks Outside the
Combat Phase
If an enemy makes an attack outside of the combat
phase, deal it a shadow card and follow each step of
“Enemy Attack Resolution” found on page 25.
If a player makes an attack outside the combat phase,
follow each step of “Player Attack Resolution” found
on page 26.

Base Value
The value of a quantity before other modifiers are
applied. For most quantities, it is also the printed value.

Blank
If an ability causes a card’s printed text box to be
considered “blank,” that text box is treated as if it
did not have any of its printed text. Text gained from
another source is not blanked.
◊ Included in a card’s text box are its abilities,
keywords, and traits.
◊ A card with a blank text box retains its flavor and/
or story text.

Campaign, Campaign Mode
See: Appendix III on page 30.

Cancel
Some card abilities (usually response abilities) can
“cancel” other card or game effects. Cancel abilities
interrupt the initiation of an effect, and prevent the
effect from initiating. Because of this, cancel abilities
have timing priority over all other abilities.
◊ If an effect is canceled, that effect is no longer
imminent, and further abilities (including
cancels) cannot be initiated in reference to the
canceled effect.
◊ When the effects of an ability are canceled, the
ability is still considered to have been used, and
any costs have still been paid.

4

◊ If the effects of an event card are canceled, the card
is still considered to have been played, and it is still
placed in its owner’s discard pile.

◊ If the effects of a treachery card are canceled, the
card is still considered to have been revealed, and it
is still placed in the encounter discard pile.

See also: Cost, Ability, Triggering Condition

Cannot
The word “cannot” is absolute, and cannot be
countermanded by other abilities or effects.

“Cannot be damaged”
A card that “cannot be damaged” cannot have damage
assigned, dealt, reassigned, or moved to it, and it
cannot be chosen to take damage or be chosen as the
target of an effect that would damage it.
◊ Any pre-existing damage on a card that gains
“cannot be damaged” remains on that card.
◊ A card that “cannot be damaged” can still be
driven from play by non-damaging effects, such
as discard.

“Cannot have attachments”
A card with the text “Cannot have attachments” cannot
have attachment cards attached to it.
◊ If a trait precedes the word “attachments,” the card
cannot have attachments of the specified trait, but it
can have attachments that do not possess that trait.
◊ If a character gains the text “cannot have
attachments,” any attachments on that character
must immediately be discarded.

See also: Attachment Cards

Card Types
The game’s card types are: quest, enemy, location,
treachery, objective, hero, ally, attachment, and event.
Each of these card types, with a detailed card anatomy,
is presented in Appendix I.
◊ If an ability causes a card type to change (such as
an ally card becoming an enemy card), it loses all
other card types it might possess and functions as
would any card of the new type.

Character Cards
Character cards represent the different companions who
come together to complete each quest.
Character cards are divided into 2 types: heroes and
allies. Any ability that refers to a “character” refers to
both types.

Some abilities, however, may refer only to a particular
type, or may exclude a type, based on the ability text.
◊ Characters enter play ready, in a player’s play area,
and under their owner’s control.
◊ Characters remain in play unless they are destroyed
or removed by a game step or ability.

See also: Ally Cards, Hero Cards, Damage, Destroy,
Hit Points, Unique Cards

The word “Choose”
The word “choose” indicates that a game element (most
often a card) must be chosen as the target of an effect.
◊ The controller of an ability that uses the word
“choose” chooses all targets for the effect unless
otherwise specified by the card.
◊ If there is no valid target for a targeting effect, the
ability cannot be initiated.

See also: Ownership and Control

Combat Phase
The steps of this phase and how to resolve attacks are
described in timing entries 6.1–6.11 on page 24-25.

Constant Ability
A constant ability is any non-keyword ability whose
text contains no boldface timing trigger defining its
ability type. A constant ability becomes active as soon
as its card enters play and remains active while the card
is in play.
◊ Some constant abilities continuously seek a specific
condition (denoted by words such as “during,” “if,”
or “while”). The effects of such abilities are active
any time the specified condition is met.
◊ If multiple instances of the same constant ability
are in play, each instance affects the game
state independently.

Cost
A card’s resource cost is the numerical value that must
be paid to play the card.
Some abilities have a cost described in the ability text
that must be paid in order to use the ability.
◊ When a player is paying a cost, the payment must
be made with cards and/or game elements that
player controls.
◊ If a cost requires a game element that is not in
play, the player paying the cost may only use game
elements that are in their out-of-play areas.
◊ If multiple costs for a single card or ability require
payment, those costs must be paid simultaneously.
◊ An ability’s cost cannot be paid if the resolution of
its effect does not have the potential to change the
game state.
◊ The word “to” is used in ability text to distinguish a
cost from an effect, in a “pay cost to resolve effect”
format.

See also: Resource Match, To

Current Quest
The “current quest” refers to the quest stage that the
players are currently attempting to defeat.

See also: Quest Cards

Damage
Damage tokens can be placed on character cards and
enemies by attacks and by various abilities.
If a character or enemy has as much (or more) damage
on it as it has hit points, it is destroyed.
The following process is used to deal damage:
1. Determine the amount of damage to deal
(including modifiers).

See also: Ability, Card Ability, Effects

2. Assign the damage to the target (character or
enemy).

Control

3. Place the damage on the target (character or
enemy).

See: Ownership and Control

See also: Destroy, Hit points, Running out of Tokens

Copy (of a card)
A copy of a card is defined by title: any other card that
shares the same title is considered a copy, regardless of
card type, text, artwork, or any other characteristic(s) of
the card(s).

5

Deckbuilding

Destroy

To build a custom player deck:

When a hero or ally is destroyed, it is placed faceup
on top of its owner’s discard pile. When an enemy is
destroyed, it is placed faceup on top of the encounter
discard pile.

◊ A player must choose 1 to 3 hero cards.
◊ A player’s deck must contain a minimum of 50
player cards.
◊ There is no upper limit on a player’s deck size.
◊ A player’s deck can only contain up to 3 copies (by
title) of any given card.

Defending Player
When an enemy makes an attack against a player, or
against a character controlled by a player, that player is
the defending player.
◊ If another player declares a sentinel character as a
defender, the player that the enemy was attacking
is still the defending player. Card effects, including
shadow card effects, that target “the defending
player” or “you” still target the player who the
enemy was attacking.
◊ If an enemy is attacking a specific character,
the player who controls that character is the
defending player.

Defense Strength
Each character and enemy has a defense strength. This
value is the amount of damage a character reduces an
attack by when it defends, or the amount of damage
an enemy reduces an attack by when that enemy
is attacked.
◊ Defense strength is denoted by the Ú symbol.

See also: Combat Phase

Delayed Effects
Some abilities contain delayed effects. Such abilities
specify a future timing point, or indicate a future
condition that may arise, and dictate an effect that is to
happen at that time.
◊ Delayed effects resolve automatically and
immediately after their specified timing point /
future condition occurs or becomes true, before
reactions to that moment may be used.
◊ When a delayed effect resolves, it is not treated as a
new triggered ability, even if the delayed effect was
originally created by a triggered ability.

See also: Ability, Effects, Triggered Ability

6

Placing a hero, ally, or enemy in the discard pile
as the result of being destroyed is not the same as
“discarding” that card.

See also: Damage

Discard Pile and Victory Display
Many game effects place cards in a player’s discard
pile, the encounter discard pile, or the victory display.
◊ Each player has their own discard pile, and the
encounter deck also has its own discard pile.
◊ When a card is discarded, it goes to the discard pile
belonging to the card’s originating deck.
◊ The victory display and each discard pile is open
information and may be looked at by any player at
any time.
◊ The order of cards in a discard pile may not be
altered unless a player is instructed to do so by a
card ability.
◊ If multiple cards would enter a discard pile
simultaneously, the owner of the cards chooses
the order in which those cards are placed in the
discard pile.

Doomed X
Doomed X is a keyword ability. If an encounter card
with the doomed keyword is revealed, each player must
raise their threat by the specified value.

Drawing cards
When a player is instructed to draw one or more cards,
those cards are drawn from the top of their deck.
When a player draws two or more cards as the result
of a single game step or card ability, those cards are
drawn simultaneously.
Drawn cards are added to a player’s hand.
There is no limit to the number of cards a player may
draw each round.
There is no maximum hand size.

See also: Running out of cards

Effects
A card effect is any effect that arises from the
resolution of ability text printed on or gained by a card.
A framework effect is any effect that arises from the
resolution of a framework step.
◊ Card effects might be preceded by costs, triggering
conditions, play restrictions, play permissions, and/
or targeting requirements. Such elements are not
considered effects.
◊ Once an ability is initiated, players must resolve as
much of each aspect of the effect as they are able,
unless the effect uses the word “may.”
◊ When a non-targeting effect attempts to engage
a number of entities (such as “draw 3 cards”
or “search the top 10 cards of your deck”) that
exceeds the number of entities that currently exist
in the specified game area, the effect engages as
many entities as possible.
◊ The expiration of a lasting effect (or the cessation
of a constant ability) is not considered to be
generating a game state change by card effect.
◊ If an ability instructs a player to select among
multiple effects, an effect that has the potential to
change the game state must be selected.

See also: Ability, Appendix I

Encounter Deck
The encounter deck contains the villains, hazards,
places, and circumstances that stand between the
players and the successful completion of their quest.
◊ An encounter deck consists of enemy, location,
treachery, and objective cards.
◊ The contents of the encounter deck are determined
by the scenario the players are attempting.

Encounter Phase
The steps of this phase and how to resolve engagement
checks are described in timing entries 5.1–5.4 on
page 24.

Enemy Cards
Enemy cards represent the villains, creatures, monsters,
and minions that attempt to capture, destroy, or mislead
the heroes as they pursue their quest.
◊ After an enemy card is revealed, it is added to the
staging area.

◊ Enemy cards remain in play until they are defeated
or removed from play by a card ability.
◊ If an enemy engages a player, it remains engaged
with that player until it is defeated or removed from
that player’s play area by a card ability.

See also: Damage, Destroy, Engagement Check

Engaged
When an enemy enters a player’s play area from
another game location, that enemy has engaged that
player, and that player has engaged that enemy.
◊ An engaged enemy does not contribute its threat
strength to the total threat strength of the staging
area. Instead, each engaged enemy makes an attack
during the combat phase.
◊ An engaged enemy remains engaged with a player
until it is destroyed, moved to another play area, or
removed from play.

See also: Combat Phase, Engagement Check

Engagement Check
When a player is instructed to make an engagement
check against an enemy in the staging area, compare
the player’s threat level to the engagement cost of the
enemy. If the player’s threat level is equal to or greater
than that enemy’s engagement cost, the enemy engages
that player by moving it from the staging area to that
player’s play area.

See also: Encounter Phase, Engaged, Optional
Engagement

Enters Play
The phrase “enters play” refers to any time a card
makes a transition from an out-of-play area or state
into play. Playing a card and putting a card into play by
using a card ability are two different means by which a
card may enter play.

Event Cards
Event cards represent actions, spells, and other
unexpected twists that might occur during the game.
◊ An event card’s ability type, triggering condition
(if any), and play permissions/restrictions (if any)
define when and how the card can be played.
◊ When a player plays an event card, its cost is paid,
its ability is resolved, and the card is then placed in
that player’s discard pile.

7

◊ Event cards engage the game state at the time they
are played and resolve. If an event card creates a
lasting effect on the game state, only cards that
are in play (or in the affected game area or game
state) at the time the event card is played are
eligible to be affected. Cards that enter play after
the resolution of the event are not affected by its
lasting effect.
◊ If the effects of an event card are canceled, the card
is still considered to have been played, and its cost
remains paid. Only the effects have been canceled.
◊ Unless the ability that puts it into play also changes
its card type to a card type that is permitted in play,
an event card cannot enter play.

See also: Appendix II, Timing of Ability Resolution,

Triggering Condition, Play Restrictions and Permissions

Exhausted
Cards are often exhausted in order to make an attack
or use certain abilities. When a card is exhausted, it is
rotated 90 degrees.
◊ An exhausted card cannot be exhausted again until
it is ready. Cards are typically readied by a game
step or card ability.
◊ A card ability on an exhausted card is active and
can still engage the game state. However, if an
exhausted card must exhaust as part of the cost to
use an ability, it cannot exhaust again, and therefore
cannot be used to pay for the ability.

See also: Ready

Explored
If the number of progress tokens on a location is equal
to or greater than its quest points, that location is
considered explored and is placed in the discard pile.
◊ Placing a location in the discard pile by exploring it
is not the same as discarding it.
◊ If the active location becomes explored during
quest resolution, place any remaining progress
tokens on to the current quest.

First Player / First Player Token
A first player is determined by the players at the
beginning of the game. The first player token is used to
indicate which player is the first player. At the end of
each refresh phase, this token passes to the next player
(the player to the left of the current first player) and
that player becomes the first player for the next round.

8

If the first player is eliminated, the first player token
immediately passes clockwise to the next player.
The players as a group are encouraged to work
together and discuss each course of action during the
game, but the first player has the final say with the
following matters:
◊ During the travel phase, the first player decides
which location the players travel to.
◊ If an encounter or quest effect targets a single
player or card, and there are multiple eligible
targets, the first player selects the target of the
effect from among the eligible options.
◊ If two or more effects trigger simultaneously,
the first player decides the order in which to
resolve them.
The first player has timing priority in the
following situations:
◊ The first player has the first opportunity to initiate
actions or act first in all standard action windows.
Action opportunities then proceed among the
remaining players in player order.
◊ The first player has the first opportunity to initiate
responses at each appropriate game moment.
Response opportunities then proceed among the
remaining players in player order.

Forced
Forced is a bold trigger word. If the word “Forced”
precedes a triggered ability, the ability’s initiation is
mandatory.
◊ For any given triggering condition, forced
responses take priority and initiate before nonforced responses of the same “when” or “after”
type.
◊ If two or more forced abilities would initiate at the
same moment, the first player determines the order
in which the abilities initiate, regardless of who
controls the cards bearing those abilities.
◊ Each forced ability must resolve as completely as
possible before the next forced ability to the same
triggering condition may initiate.
◊ A forced effect must be in play and active at the
time its trigger occurs in order to resolve its effect.

See also: Triggered Ability

Framework Effects and
Framework Steps
A framework step is a mandatory occurrence, dictated
by the structure of the game. A framework effect
is any effect that arises from the resolution of a
framework step.
See also: Appendix I

Gains
The word “gains” is used in multiple contexts.
◊ If a player gains resources, those resources are
taken from the token bank and added to the
specified hero’s resource pool.
◊ If a card gains a characteristic (such as a trait,
keyword, or ability text), the card functions as
if it possesses the gained characteristic. Gained
characteristics are not considered to be printed on
the card.

Guarded
Guarded is a keyword ability. When an objective with
the guarded keyword is revealed (even during Setup),
reveal the next card from the encounter deck and attach
the card with the guarded keyword to it and place them
both in the staging area.
If the next card also has the guarded keyword, use the
next card of the encounter deck to fulfill the original
keyword effect, and then resolve the guarded keyword
on the second card.
Enemy and location cards attached to guarded objectives
do count their threat while in the staging area.
While an objective has one or more encounter cards
attached to it, it cannot be claimed. Once all attached
encounter cards are dealt with, the objective remains in
the staging area until it is claimed.
An unguarded objective can be claimed in the manner
specified by its card text.
An encounter card attached to a guarded objective is
dealt with in the following method, depending on its
card type:
◊ Enemy: The enemy leaves play, either by being
defeated or as the result of a card effect.
◊ Location: The location leaves play, either by being
explored or as the result of a card effect.
◊ Treachery: The treachery’s effects resolve, or
are canceled.

Hero Cards
Hero cards represent the main characters a player
controls while playing a scenario. Heroes start in
play, and they provide the resources that are used to
pay for the cards (allies, attachments, and events) in a
player’s deck.
Heroes can commit to quests, attack, defend, and
in many cases they bring their own card abilities to
the game.
◊ Each player chooses 1-3 hero cards and starts the
game with them in play.
◊ Hero cards remain in play unless destroyed or
otherwise removed from play by a card ability.

See also: Damage, Destroy, Hit Points, Appendix II

Hit Points
Each character and enemy has a hit point value. If the
damage sustained by a character or enemy is the same
or greater than their hit points, it is destroyed.

See also: Ally Cards, Character Cards, Damage,
Destroy, Enemy Cards, Hero Cards

Immune
If a card is immune to a specified set of effects, it
cannot be chosen as the target for or affected by effects
that belong to that set.
◊ Immunity only protects the immune card itself.
Peripheral entities (such as attachments, tokens
on the card, and abilities that originate from the
immune card) are not themselves immune.
◊ If a card gains immunity, pre-existing lasting
effects that have been applied to the card are
recalculated to account for the immunity.

In Play and Out of Play
Faceup cards in the staging area or a player’s play area
are considered “in play.” Additionally, the top card of
the quest deck and the active location are also in play.
“Out of play” refers to the cards in a player’s hand,
deck, and discard pile, the encounter deck, encounter
discard pile, cards in the victory display, cards set
aside, and cards removed from the game.
◊ Card abilities only interact with, and can only
target, cards that are in play, unless the ability text
specifically refers to an out-of-play area.

See also: Objective

9

◊ Card abilities can only be initiated or affect the
game from an in-play area unless they specifically
refer to being used from an out-of-play area, or
require that the card be out of play for the ability
to resolve. Play restrictions and permissions are an
exception that may affect how a card may or may
not be deployed or used.
◊ A card enters play when it moves from an out-ofplay origin to a play area.
◊ A card leaves play when it moves from a play area
to an out-of-play destination.

See also: Ability, Effects

Initial Threat Level
A player’s initial threat level is the combined threat
cost of each hero under that player’s control.

See also: Setup

Initiating Abilities / Playing Cards
When a player wishes to play a card, or initiate a
triggered ability, that player first declares their intent.
The following steps are then observed, in order:
1. Check play restrictions: can the card be played,
or the ability initiated, at this time?
2. Determine the cost (or costs, if multiple costs
are required) to play the card or initiate the ability.
3. Apply any modifiers to the cost(s).
4. Pay the cost(s).
5. Choose target(s), if applicable.
6. The card is played, or the ability resolves.
If any of the above steps would make the triggering
condition of a response ability true, that ability may be
initiated when that triggering condition becomes true.

See also: Cost, Planning Phase

In Player Order
If players are instructed to perform a sequence “in
player order,” the first player performs their part of
the sequence first, followed by the other players in
clockwise order.
◊ If a sequence performed in player order does not
conclude after each player has performed their
aspect of the sequence once, the sequence of
opportunities continues to proceed in a clockwise
manner until it is complete.
◊ The phrase “next player” always refers to the next
(clockwise) player in player order.

Instead
See: Replacement Effects

Keywords
A keyword is an attribute which conveys specific rules
to its card. The keywords are: Doomed, Guarded,
Permanent, Ranged, Restricted, Sentinel, Surge, and
Victory.
◊ Some keywords are followed by reminder text,
which is presented in italics. Reminder text is a
shorthand explanation of how a keyword works,
but it is not rules text and does not replace the rules
for that keyword in this glossary.
◊ If a card gains multiple instances of a numerative
keyword, each instance stacks. For example,
if a treachery card with Doomed 2 gains
Dooomed 1 from another source when it is
revealed, it will have a total of Doomed 3.

Lasting Effects
Some card abilities create effects or conditions that
affect the game state for a specified duration (such as
“until the end of the phase” or “until the end of this
attack”). Such effects are known as lasting effects.
◊ A lasting effect persists beyond the resolution of the
ability that created it, for a duration specified by the
effect. The effect continues to affect the game state
for the specified duration whether or not the card
that created the lasting effect is or remains in play.

10

◊ If a lasting effect generated by a player card affects
in-play cards (or a specified set of cards), it is only
applied to cards that are in play (or that meet the
specifications of the set) at the time the lasting
effect is established. Cards that enter play (or
change status to meet the criteria of the specified
set) after a lasting effect’s establishment are not
subsequently affected by that lasting effect.

◊ If a lasting effect generated by an encounter card
or quest card affects in-play cards (or a specified
set of cards), it is applied to all cards that meet its
criteria regardless of their play-state at the time
the lasting effect is established. Cards that enter
play (or change status to meet the criteria of the
specified set) after a lasting effect’s establishment
are subsequently affected by that lasting effect
the same as cards that are in-play at the time of
its establishment. This aids the encounter deck’s
ability to create effective card combinations.

May

◊ A lasting effect expires as soon as the timing point
specified by its duration is reached. This means
that an “until the end of the round” lasting effect
expires just before an “at the end of the round”
ability or delayed effect may initiate.

Any time a new modifier is applied (or removed),
the entire quantity is recalculated from the start,
considering the unmodified base value and all
active modifiers.

◊ A lasting effect that expires at the end of a
specified time period can only be initiated during
that time period.

Limits
“Limit X per <phase / round>” is a limit that appears
on some player cards. These limits are card specific.
Each copy of an ability with such a limit may be used
X times per phase / round, per instance of that ability.
“Limit X per game” is a limit that appears on some
player cards. These limits are player specific. Each
copy of an ability with such a limit may only be used X
times per game by a player, regardless of which card is
used to trigger that effect.
◊ If an effect with a limit is canceled, the card is
still considered to have been played or the ability
initiated, and it counts toward the limit.

Location Cards
Location cards represent the perilous places to which
the player may travel during a scenario.
◊ After a location is revealed, it is added to the
staging area.
◊ Location cards remain in play until they
are explored.
◊ If the players travel to a location, it becomes the
active location.

See also: Active Location, Explored, Travel

The word “may” indicates that a specified player has
the option to do that which follows. If no player is
specified, the option is granted to the controller of the
card with the ability in question.

Modifiers
The game state constantly checks and (if necessary)
updates the count of any variable quantity that is
being modified.

◊ The calculation of a value treats all modifiers as
being applied simultaneously. However, while
performing the calculation, all additive and
subtractive modifiers should be calculated before
doubling and/or halving modifiers are calculated.
◊ If a value is “set” to a specific number, the set
modifier overrides all non-set modifiers. If multiple
set modifiers are in conflict, the most recently
resolved set modifier takes precedence.
◊ After all active modifiers have been taken into
account, if a value is below 0, it is treated as 0. A
card cannot have “negative” icons, attributes, traits,
cost, or keywords.
◊ Fractional values are rounded up after all modifiers
have been applied.

Move
Some abilities allow players to move game elements,
such as damage, cards, or tokens.
◊ When an entity “moves,” it cannot move to
its same (current) placement. If there is no
valid destination for a move, the move attempt
cannot initiate.

Mulligan
After a player draws their starting hand during setup,
that player has the option to declare a mulligan. After
doing so, the player reshuffles the starting hand into
their deck and draws a new starting hand. The player
must keep this second hand.

11

Multiple Defenders
Some card abilities allow players to declare multiple
defenders for an attack.
◊ Pool the defense strength of each defender while
resolving the attack.
◊ The defending player must assign all damage from
the attack to a single character that was involved in
defending.

Neutral Cards
Neutral cards do not belong to a sphere of influence.
◊ A player may pay for neutral cards with resources
from any of their heroes’ pools.
◊ A player may combine resources from heroes that
belong to different spheres of influence to pay for a
neutral card.

Next Player
The term “next player” always refers to the next
clockwise player (from the current active player, or
from the player who most recently performed a game
function or passed) in player order.
In a single-player game there is no next player and card
effects that target the next player will not trigger.

Objective Cards
Objective cards represent a range of different elements
from the goal of a scenario, from allies who assist the
players, to keys that allow the players to advance to the
next stage of the quest, to artifacts that are necessary to
overcome a particular challenge.
◊ After an objective is revealed, it is added to the
staging area.
◊ Objective cards remain in play unless the game
instructs the players to remove them from play.
◊ The encounter deck has control of the objective. If
a player claims an objective, then that player gains
control of that objective.

Optional Engagement
During the optional engagement step of the encounter
phase (framework step 5.2), each player has the option
to engage one enemy in the staging area. This is called
“optionally engaging an enemy.”
◊ Each player has one chance to optionally engage an
enemy during the optional engagement step.

12

◊ An enemy’s engagement cost has no bearing on
optional engagements.

See also: Encounter Phase, Engaged, Engagement
Check

Out of Play
See: In Play and Out of Play

Ownership and Control
A card’s owner is the player whose deck held the card
at the start of the game. The scenario is considered to
be the owner of the encounter deck and each encounter
card.
◊ By default, cards enter play under their owner’s
control. Encounter cards are considered to be under
the control of the scenario.
◊ A card’s controller is the player who currently
controls the card. Some abilities may cause cards to
change control during a game.
◊ A player controls the cards in their out-of-play
game areas (such as the hand, the deck, and the
discard pile).
◊ If a card that has changed control leaves play, after
the resolution of the game occurrence that drives
it from play, the card is physically placed in its
owner’s equivalent out of play area (hand, deck, or
discard pile). Other card abilities cannot interact
with this secondary physical placement.
◊ When a character changes control while it is in
play, it remains in the same state it was in before
(i.e., readied or exhausted, damaged or not, etc.)
and is moved to its new controller’s play area.
◊ Attachments on a card that changes control also
change control to the same new controller.
◊ Unless a duration is specified, a control change
persists as long as the card remains in play.

Permanent
See: Campaign Pool rules on page 31.

Planning Phase
The steps of this phase and how to play cards are
described in timing entries 2.1–2.4 on page 22-23.

Play and Put into Play
Playing a card involves paying the card’s resource cost
and placing the card in the play area. This causes the

card to enter play (or, in the case of an event card, to
resolve its ability and be placed in the discard pile).
Cards are played from a player’s hand.

in their owners’ discard piles. Any enemies engaged
with that player are returned to the staging area,
retaining any damage tokens that are on them.

Some abilities cause cards to be put into play. This
bypasses the need to pay the card’s cost, as well as
any restrictions or prohibitions regarding the potential
of playing that card. A card that is put into play enters
play in its controller’s play area.

◊ When a player is eliminated, the remaining players
continue to play the game, revealing one less
encounter card during the quest phase now that
there is one less player in the game.

◊ A card that is put into play is not considered to
have been played.
◊ In order to play a card, its cost (after modifiers)
must be paid.
◊ When a card is put into play, its resource cost
is ignored.
◊ Unless otherwise instructed by the put into play
effect, cards that enter play in this manner must do
so in a play area or state that matches the rules of
playing the card.
◊ When an event card is played, place it on the table,
resolve its ability, and place the card in its owner’s
discard pile.

Play Restrictions and Permissions
Many cards or abilities contain specific instructions
pertaining to when or how they may or may not be
used, or to specific conditions that must be true in order
to use them.
◊ In order to use an ability or play a card, all of its
play restrictions must be observed.
◊ A permission is an optional play restriction, which
allows a player to play a card or use an ability
outside the timing or specifications generally
provided by the game rules.

See also: May

Player Deck
The player deck includes a combination of ally,
attachment, and event cards shuffled into a deck from
which a player draws their cards throughout the game.

See also: Deckbuilding, Running Out of Cards

Player Elimination
A player is eliminated from the game if all of their
heroes are killed, if their threat level reaches 50, or if a
card effect forces their elimination.
◊ When a player is eliminated, that player’s hand, all
of the cards they control, and their deck are placed

◊ If all players are eliminated, the game ends in a loss
for the players.

Playing a Card
See: Initiating Abilities/ Playing Cards

Printed
The word “printed” refers to the text, characteristic, or
value that is physically printed on the card.

Priority of Simultaneous
Resolution
If two or more effects with the same bold timing
trigger would resolve simultaneously, the first player
determines the order in which the effects resolve.

Put into Play
See: Play and Put into Play

Qualifiers
If card text includes a qualifier followed by multiple
terms, the qualifier applies to each item in the list, if it
is applicable. For example, in the phrase “each ready
character and attachment” the word “ready” applies
to both “character” and “attachment.”

Quest Advancement
Players immediately advance to the next stage of a
quest as soon as they place a number of progress tokens
equal to or greater than the number of quest points the
current quest card has.
◊ Additional progress tokens earned against the quest
do not carry over to the next stage.

Quest Cards / Quest Deck
Each quest card represents one of the various stages of
the quest the players are pursuing in a scenario. Each
quest card is a numbered step in a fixed, sequential
order, arranged in a stack called “the quest deck.”

See also: Appendix II

13

Quest Phase
The steps of this phase and how to resolve the quest are
described in timing entries 3.1–3.5 on page 23.

Ranged
Ranged is a keyword ability. A character with the
ranged keyword can be declared by its controller as
an attacker against enemies that are engaged with
another player.
A character can declare ranged attacks against these
targets while its owner is declaring attacks, or it can
participate in attacks that are declared by other players.
In either case, the character must exhaust and meet any
other requirements necessary to make the attack.

Ready
Cards enter play in a ready state, positioned so that
their controller can read their text from left to right.
◊ If a player is instructed to ready an exhausted card,
the card is returned to this ready state.

See also: Exhausted

Refresh Phase
The steps of this phase are described in timing entries
7.1–7.5 on page 25.

Resources
Resources are the game’s currency and are used to pay
for cards and card abilities.
Resource tokens begin the game in the token bank.
When a hero gains resources transfer them from
the token bank to the hero’s resource pool. When a
player spends resources from a hero’s resource pool,
transfer them from the hero’s resource pool back to the
token bank.

See also: Cost, Running out of Tokens

Resource Match
In order for a player to play a card, they must pay for it
by spending resource tokens from the resource pool of
a hero who has a resource icon that matches that card’s
sphere of influence.
◊ If a card is 0 cost and belongs to a sphere of
influence, a resource match is still required to play
that card.
◊ Neutral cards do not require a resource match
to play.

Removed from Game

See also: Sphere of Influence

“Removed from the game” is an out-of-play state.
A card that has been removed from the game is set
aside and has no further interaction with the game in
any manner for the duration of its removal. If there is
no specified duration, a card that has been removed
from the game is considered removed until the end of
the game.

Resource Phase

Replacement Effects
A replacement effect is an effect that replaces the
handling of one resolution with a different means of
handling that resolution. Most replacement effects are
response abilities in the format of “when triggering
condition would happen, do [replacement effect]
instead.” After all responses to the original triggering
condition have resolved and it is time to resolve the
triggering condition itself, the replacement effect
resolves instead.

14

◊ If multiple replacement effects are initiated against
the same triggering condition, the most recent
replacement effect is the one that is used for the
resolution of the triggering condition.

The steps of this phase and how to collect resources are
described in timing entries 1.1–1.4 on page 22.

Response
Response abilities are labeled by the word “Response”
followed by ability text. Unlike action abilities, which
are resolved during action windows, response abilities
may be executed after the specified triggering condition
occurs, as described in the response’s ability text.
◊ It is possible for multiple responses to be executed
from the same triggering condition.
◊ When two or more response abilities share the
same trigger, resolve all response effects that use
the word “when” before resolving response effects
that use the word “after.”
◊ A response ability is always used immediately
after its triggering condition has occurred and
has been resolved. The first player always has
the first opportunity to use an ability in response

to a given triggering condition, followed by the
next player, and so forth. Response opportunities
for that triggering condition alternate between
players in this manner until all players have
passed consecutively.

players to play the same scenario multiple times with
different hero and deck combinations, evaluating their
effectiveness in each game.

◊ Once the opportunity to react to a triggering
condition has been passed by all players, further
responses to that specific triggering condition
cannot be used.

1. Add together three undesirable elements: the
final threat level of each player, the threat penalty
on all defeated heroes, and the number of damage
tokens on all surviving heroes.

See also: Priority of Simultaneous Resolution, Timing
and Ability Resolution

Restricted
Restricted is a keyword ability. Each character
cannot have more than 2 attachments with the
restricted keyword.
If a third restricted attachment is ever attached to
a character, one of the restricted attachments must
immediately be moved to its owner’s discard pile.

Reveal
When a player is instructed to reveal an encounter card,
the player takes the top card of the encounter deck,
turns it faceup, and resolves the staging of that card,
including any keywords and “when revealed” effects.

Running out of Cards
If a player runs out of cards in their player deck, that
player continues to play the game with the cards they
have in play and in their hand. The player does not
reshuffle their discard pile.
If the encounter deck is ever out of cards during the
quest phase, the encounter discard pile is shuffled and
reset back into the encounter deck.

Running out of Tokens
There is no limit to the number of resource, damage, or
progress tokens which can be in the play area at a given
time.
If players run out of the provided resource, damage, or
progress tokens, other tokens or coins may be used to
track the current game state.

See also: Damage, Resources

Scoring

If the players win the game, use this process to
determine their group’s score for the game.

2. Add 10 for each completed round of the game.
3. Subtract any victory points that have
been collected.
When a player is eliminated, their threat automatically
raises to 50, and all of that player’s heroes are defeated.
With this scoring system, victory with a low score is
more desirable than victory with a high score.

Search
When a player is instructed to search for a card, the
player is permitted to look at each of the cards in the
searched area.
If the player finds a card that meets the eligibility
requirements being searched for, the player may add
that card to the game area indicated by the instructions
on the search effect.
◊ Cards in the process of being searched are not
considered to leave the searched area.

Self-referential Abilities
Self-referential abilities refer only to the card on
which the ability is located, and not to other copies of
that card.

Sentinel
Sentinel is a keyword ability. A character with the
sentinel keyword may be declared as a defender during
enemy attacks that are made against other players.
A character may declare sentinel defense after the
player engaged with the enemy making the attack
declares no defenders.
The defending sentinel character must exhaust and
meet any other requirements necessary to defend
the attack.

Scoring is a useful tool in evaluating the performance
of a deck or a party over time, or in comparing one
deck or group of decks to another. This enables

15

Setup

Shadow Effects

Setup occurs before the game begins.

Some encounter cards have a secondary effect known
as a shadow effect. These effects are offset from a
card’s non-shadow text by the “shadow bar” graphic.
They are also denoted by the bold italic “Shadow:”
trigger on the card.

Card effects triggered during Setup are fully resolved.
In order to set up the game, follow these 7 steps:
1. Shuffle Decks – Shuffle all player decks and
the encounter deck. Do not shuffle the quest deck.
2. Place Heroes and Set Initial Threat Levels
– Each player places their heroes in their play
area, adds up the threat cost of the heroes they
control, and sets their threat dial at the same value.
This value is that player’s initial threat level for
the game.
3. Setup Token Bank – Place the damage tokens,
progress tokens, and resources tokens in a pile
next to the encounter deck. All players take tokens
from this bank as needed throughout the game.
4. Determine First Player – The players
determine a first player based on a majority group
decision. If this proves impossible, determine a
first player at random. Once determined, the first
player takes the first player token and places it in
front of them as reference.
5. Draw Setup Hand – Each player draws 6
cards from the top of their player deck. If a player
does not wish to keep this starting hand, that
player may take a single mulligan.
6. Set Quest Cards – Arrange the quest cards
in sequential order, based off the numbers on the
back of each card. Stage 1A should be on top, with
the numbers increasing in sequence moving down
the stack. Place the quest deck near the encounter
deck, in the center of the play area.
7. Follow Scenario Setup Instructions – The
back of the first quest card typically provides
setup instructions for a scenario. Follow these
instructions before flipping the quest card.
After completing these steps, players begin the game
starting with the first game round.

16

◊ Shadow effects only resolve when dealt as a
shadow card during an enemy attack.

Spheres of Influence
There are four different spheres of influence, as
depicted in the diagram below.
If a player card has a sphere of influence icon, then it
belongs to that sphere of influence.

See also: Resource Match

Spheres of Influence
Leadership

Ì

Lore

Î

Spirit

Ê

Tactics

Ï

Staging

Switch

Staging is the term used to describe the process of
revealing an encounter card from the encounter deck,
resolving its effects, and placing that card.

Some effects use the word “switch.” In order to resolve
such an effect, switched items must exist on each side
of the switch.

The staging of each encounter card follows these steps:

◊ When switching values, a value of “0” may be
switched, but a null entry for the pertinent value
field cannot be switched.

1. Reveal the encounter card by turning it faceup
so that its game text is visible.
2. Resolve any keywords and/or when revealed
effects on the encounter card.
3. Place the encounter card in the appropriate
game area. If the revealed encounter card is an
enemy, location, or objective it is placed in the
staging area. If the revealed encounter card is
a treachery card, it is placed in the encounter
discard pile.

Staging Area
The staging area is a unique element of the game’s
playing field. It represents the potential dangers the
players might face as they progress on their quest.
◊ When an enemy, location, or objective is revealed,
it is added to the staging area.
◊ While a location is in the staging area, the players
are not at that location. Each location in the staging
area contributes its threat strength to the total threat
strength in the staging area.
◊ While an enemy is in the staging area, it is not
engaged with a player. Each enemy in the staging
area contributes its threat strength to the total threat
strength in the staging area.

Surge
Surge is a keyword ability. When an encounter card
with the surge keyword is revealed (even during Setup),
reveal 1 additional encounter card.
If an encounter card has more than 1 instance of surge,
reveal 1 additional encounter card for each separate
instance.
Resolve the surge keyword immediately after resolving
the staging of the encounter card.

Table Talk
Players are permitted and encouraged to talk to one
another during play, and to work as a team to plan and
execute the best course of action. Players can discuss
anything they would like, including cards in play and
cards in their hand, but each player cannot look at
cards in another player’s hand or tell other players what
to do.

Then
If the effect text of an ability includes the word “then,”
the text preceding the word “then” must be successfully
resolved (or be true) in full before the remainder of the
effect described after the word “then” can be resolved.
◊ If the pre-then aspect of an effect does successfully
resolve, the resolution of the post-then aspect of the
effect must also attempt to resolve.
◊ If the pre-then aspect of an effect does not
successfully resolve in full, the post-then aspect
does not attempt to resolve.

See also: Response, Triggered Ability

Threat / Threat Dial
Threat represents the level of risk a player has taken
on during a scenario. The threat dial is used to track a
player’s threat level throughout the game.
◊ A player’s threat cannot be reduced below 0.

Threat Elimination Level
The threat elimination level is the threat level at which
a player is eliminated from the game.
If a player’s threat level reaches 50, that player is
immediately eliminated from the game.

17

Timing of Ability Resolution

Travel Phase

When multiple triggered abilities share the same
trigger, they are resolved in the following order:

The steps of this phase and how to travel to locations
are described in timing entries 4.1–4.3 on page 23.

1. Constant abilities
2. Forced abilities
3. Response abilities
When determining the order of effect resolution among
abilities within those categories, abilities that use the
word “when” are resolved before abilities that use the
word “after.”
◊ If two or more effects would occur simultaneously,
the first player decides the order in which the
effects resolve.
◊ Cancel abilities interrupt this timing structure and
may only be played immediately whenever their
trigger condition would be met.

See also: Cancel

To
Many card abilities are presented in a “do X to do
Y” construct. In such a construct, the “do X” aspect
(preceding the word “to”) is considered a cost, and the
“do Y” aspect (following the word “to”) is considered
an effect.
◊ If an ability’s cost is not paid, its effect cannot
be resolved.

Treachery Cards
Treachery cards represent traps, curses, maneuvers,
pitfalls, and other surprises the players might confront
during a scenario.
When a treachery cards is revealed, its abilities are
resolved immediately. After its abilities are resolved, it
is placed in the encounter discard pile.

Triggered Ability
A bold timing command, followed by a colon and the
rest of the ability, is indicative of a triggered ability.
◊ Action, response, forced, and when revealed
abilities are triggered abilities.
◊ A triggered ability on a player card can only be
initiated if its effect has the potential to change the
game state on its own. This potential is assessed
without taking into account the consequences of the
cost payment or future responses to the effect.
◊ Unless prefaced by the word forced, all action and
response abilities are optional.
◊ Forced abilities and when revealed abilities are
triggered automatically by the game at the ability’s
appropriate timing point.

See also: Cost

See also: Triggering Condition

Traits

Triggering Condition

Most cards have one or more traits listed at the top of
the text box and printed in Bold Italics.
◊ Traits have no inherent effects on the game.
Instead, some card abilities reference cards that
possess or lack specific traits.

Travel
Some locations have a bold Travel cost. In order to
travel to such a location, its Travel cost must first be
paid.
If the players cannot pay the Travel cost, then they
cannot travel to that location.

A triggering condition is specific occurrence that takes
place in the game. On card abilities, the triggering
condition is the element of the ability that references
such an occurrence, indicating the timing point at
which the ability may be used. The description of an
ability’s triggering condition usually follows the word
“when” or “after.”
◊ If a single game occurrence creates multiple
triggering conditions (such as a single attack
causing a character to both take damage and be
defeated), those triggering conditions are handled
with a single response window in which abilities
that refer to any of the triggering conditions created
by the occurrence may be used in any order.

See also: After, Response, When

18

Type, Types

Winning the Game

See: Card Types

If at least one player survives through the completion
of the final stage of the scenario, the game ends in a
victory for the players.

Unique Cards
The ‰ symbol before a card’s title indicates the card
is “unique.” The players as a group may have only one
copy of each unique card, by title, in play.
◊ A player cannot play or put into play a unique card
if a copy of that card is already in play.
◊ If a unique version of a character enters play from
the encounter deck and there is already a copy of
that character under a player’s control, that player
must discard the version they control.

See also: Ownership and Control

Victory

◊ Some card abilities can introduce additional
victory conditions to the game. Such a condition
immediately ends the game if it is met.

See also: Player Elimination

The letter “X”
Unless specified by a card ability or granted player
choice, the letter X is always equal to 0.
◊ For costs involving the letter X, the value of X
is defined by card ability or player choice, after
which the amount paid may be modified by effects
without altering the functional value of X.

Victory is a keyword ability. When an enemy or
location with the victory keyword is defeated or
explored, it is placed in the victory display instead of
the encounter discard pile.
The victory keyword appears on the lower right portion
of a card and is not considered to be part of the card’s
text box. Card effects that blank a card’s text box do
not blank the victory keyword.
At the end of the game, victory points in the victory
display are applied to the group’s score.

See also: Scoring

When
The word “when” refers to a game occurrence that
is underway but not yet concluded. Some response
abilities use the word “when” to specify the timing of
their triggering condition.

See also: Triggering Condition

Willpower Strength
Each character has a willpower strength. This value
indicates the contribution the character makes toward
successfully questing while it is committed to a quest.
◊ Willpower strength is denoted by the Ò symbol.

See also: Quest Phase

19

Appendix I:
Timing and Gameplay
This section provides a detailed overview of the phases
and framework steps of an entire game round. The
phase sequence timing chart depicts each framework
step and action window that occurs throughout a game
round. The “Framework Details” section explains how
to handle each framework step presented in the game’s
flow chart, in the order that the framework steps occur
throughout the round.

Framework Steps
Numbered items presented in the brown boxes are
known as framework steps. Framework steps are
mandatory occurrences dictated by the structure of the
game. Green windows are special framework steps
that indicate the possibility of the game returning to
an earlier framework step in the chart. These repetitive
sequences can end in various ways, such as when all
players have performed the steps in a sequence, or
when a player makes a specific decision. Each of these
windows explains when and how the game either loops
back or progresses to a later framework step.

Action Windows
An action ability may only be triggered during an
action window. Action windows are presented in red
boxes on the chart. When an action window opens,
the first player has the first opportunity to initiate an
action, or pass. Opportunities to initiate actions then
proceed in player order until all players consecutively
pass, at which point the action window closes and the
game advances to the next step on the timing chart.
Note that if a player passes their opportunity to act,
but all other players do not consecutively pass in
sequence, the original player may still take an action
when the progression of action opportunities comes
back around to that player.
Resolve each action completely before the next
action opportunity.

20

0.0 Round Begins
I. RESOURCE PHASE
1.1 Resource phase begins
1.2 Gain resources
1.3 Draw cards

ACTION WINDOW
1.4 Resource phase ends

II. PLANNING PHASE
2.1 Planning phase begins
2.2 Special action window
(active player may also play allies and attachments)
2.3 Next player (in player order) becomes
active player (loop back to 2.2, or proceed to 2.4)
2.4 Planning phase ends

3.1 Quest phase begins

ACTION WINDOW
3.2 Commit characters

ACTION WINDOW
3.3 Staging

ACTION WINDOW
3.4 Quest resolution

ACTION WINDOW
3.5 Quest phase ends

6.1 Combat phase begins

6.2 Deal shadow cards

ACTION WINDOW
6.3 “Resolve enemy attacks” process begins
6.4a Active player resolves next enemy attack (go
to Enemy Attack Resolution). Repeat this step until
all of that player’s eligible enemies have attacked
6.5 Next player becomes active player
(return to 6.4a). If all players have resolved enemy
attacks, proceed to 6.6.
6.6 “Resolve Enemy Attacks” ends
6.7 “Player Attacks” begin
6.8a Active player declares next attack
(go to Player Attack Resolution). Repeat this step
until all of that player’s eligible attacks have been
made

4.1 Travel phase begins
4.2 Travel opportunity

6.9 Next player becomes active player
(return to 6.8a). If all players have resolved player
attacks, proceed to 6.10.

ACTION WINDOW

6.10 “Player Attacks” end.

4.3 Travel phase ends

6.11 Combat phase ends. Discard all shadow cards.

5.1 Encounter phase begins

7.1 Refresh phase begins

5.2 Optional engagement

7.2 Ready all cards

ACTION WINDOW

7.3 Raise threat

5.3 Engagement checks

7.4 Pass first player token

ACTION WINDOW

ACTION WINDOW

5.4 Encounter phase ends

7.5 Refresh phase ends

0.1 Round ends
21

Framework Details
6.4b Enemy attack initiates
(active player chooses enemy)

ACTION WINDOW
6.4.1 Declare defender

ACTION WINDOW
6.4.2 Reveal and resolve shadow effect

ACTION WINDOW
6.4.3 Determine combat damage

ACTION WINDOW
6.4.4 Enemy attack ends. If active player has more
enemy attacks to resolve, return to 6.4).
Otherwise, proceed to 6.5.

Each of the following entries corresponds to the
framework step of the same number on the Round
Sequence Timing Chart.

0.0 Round begins
This step formalizes the beginning of a game round.
The beginning of a round is an important game
milestone that may be referenced in card text, either as
a point at which an ability may or must resolve, or as a
point at which a lasting effect or constant ability begins
or expires.

I. Resource Phase
1.1 Resource phase begins
This step formalizes the beginning of the resource
phase.
The beginning of a phase is an important game
milestone that may be referenced in card text, either as
a point at which an ability may or must resolve, or as a
point at which a lasting effect or constant ability begins
or expires.

1.2 Gain resources

6.8b Player attack initiates (active player declares
target of attack and attacker(s))
6.8.1 Ranged option

ACTION WINDOW
6.8.2 Determine attack STR

ACTION WINDOW
6.8.3 Determine combat damage

ACTION WINDOW
6.8.4 Player attack ends. If active player has more
player attacks to resolve, return to 6.8. Otherwise,
proceed to 6.9.

Each player simultaneously adds 1 resource to each of
their heroes’ resource pools.

1.3 Draw cards
Each player simultaneously draws 1 card.

1.4 Resource phase ends
This step formalizes the end of the resource phase.
The end of a phase is an important game milestone
that may be referenced in card text, either as a point
at which an ability may or must resolve, or as a point
at which a lasting effect or constant ability expires
or begins.

II. Planning Phase
2.1 Planning phase begins
This step formalizes the beginning of the
planning phase.

2.2 Planning action window
This is a special action window in which the active
player (in addition to triggering standard action
abilities) is permitted to play ally and attachment cards
from their hand.

22

To play a card from hand, a player must pay the card’s
resource cost by spending resource tokens from the
resource pools of one or more of their heroes that
match the sphere of influence of the card being played.
Spent resources are removed from heroes’ resource
pools and returned to the general token bank.
This action window remains open until all players
consecutively pass, so that the active player has the
opportunity to play as many ally and attachment cards
as they desire and can afford at this time.

2.3 Next active player
The next player (in player order) becomes the active
player. Return to step 2.2.
If all players have been the active player this phase,
proceed.

2.4 Planning phase ends
This step formalizes the end of the planning phase.

III. Quest Phase
3.1 Quest phase begins
This step formalizes the beginning of the quest phase.

3.2 Commit characters
In player order, each player has an opportunity to
commit any number of their characters to the quest.
To commit a character to a quest, a player must exhaust
the character.

3.3 Staging
The encounter deck reveals one card per player. This
is known in the game as “staging.” These cards are
revealed one at a time, with any when revealed abilities
being resolved before the next card is revealed.
Enemy, location, and objective cards revealed in this
manner are placed in the staging area.
Treachery cards are resolved and (unless otherwise
indicated by the card text) placed in the discard pile.
If the encounter deck is ever empty during the quest
phase, the encounter discard pile is shuffled and reset
back into the encounter deck.

3.4 Quest resolution
Compare the combined willpower strength (Ò) of
all committed characters against the combined threat
strength ($) of all cards in the staging area.

If the Ò is higher, the players have successfully
quested, and they make progress on the quest. A
number of progress tokens equal to the amount by
which their Ò overcame the $ are placed on the
current quest card. Note: If there is an active location,
progress tokens are placed on that location until it is
explored, and the remainder are then placed on the
current quest.
If the $ is higher, the players have unsuccessfully
quested and they are driven back by the encounter
deck. Each player must raise their threat dial by the
amount by which the $ was higher than the combined
Ò of all committed characters.
If the combined committed Ò score is equal to the $
score in the staging area, the players have not quested
successfully or unsuccessfully: no progress tokens are
placed, and the players do not increase their dials.
Characters committed to a quest are considered
committed to that quest through the end of the quest
phase, unless a card ability removes them from the
quest. Those characters do not ready at the end of
this step.

3.5 Quest phase ends
This step formalizes the end of the quest phase.

IV. Travel Phase
4.1 Travel phase begins
This step formalizes the beginning of the travel phase.

4.2 Travel opportunity
The players (as a group) have the opportunity to travel
to any one location in the staging area by removing
it from the staging area and placing it alongside the
current quest card. This causes the location to become
the active location.
The players can only travel to one location at a time.
The first player makes the final decision on whether
and where to travel.
Players cannot travel to a new location if another
location card is active; the players must explore the
active location before traveling elsewhere.

4.3 Travel phase ends
This step formalizes the end of the travel phase.

23

V. Encounter Phase

VI. Combat Phase

5.1 Encounter phase begins

6.1 Combat phase begins

This step formalizes the beginning of the
encounter phase.

This step formalizes the beginning of the combat phase.

5.2 Optional engagement
Each player (in player order) has one option to engage
one enemy in the staging area. This is done by moving
the enemy from the staging area and placing it in front
of the engaging player, in that player’s play area.
The enemy’s engagement cost has no bearing on
this procedure.

5.3 Engagement checks
The players make a series of engagement checks,
to determine if any of the enemies remaining in the
staging area engage them.
The first player compares their threat level against the
engagement cost of each of the enemies in the staging
area. The enemy with the highest engagement cost
that is equal to or lower than this player’s threat level
engages the player and is moved from the staging area
into the space in front of the player. This is known as
making an engagement check.
After the first player makes an engagement check, the
next player (in player order) makes an engagement
check. Once all players have made an engagement
check, the first player makes second engagement
check. Players continue making engagement checks in
this manner until there are no enemies remaining in the
staging area that can engage any of the players.
Whether an enemy is engaged through an engagement
check, through a card effect, or through a player’s
choice, the end result is the same: the enemy is
considered to have engaged the player, and the player is
considered to have engaged the enemy.

5.4 Encounter phase ends
This step formalizes the end of the encounter phase.

6.2 Deal shadow cards
Deal one card from the encounter deck, facedown,
to each engaged enemy. These cards are known as
shadow cards.
Deal shadow cards to each player’s enemies in player
order.
When dealing to a single player’s enemies, deal to the
enemy with the highest engagement cost first, to the
enemy with the next highest engagement cost second,
and so forth, until each of that player’s engaged
enemies has been dealt a shadow card.
If the encounter deck runs out of cards, any enemies
that have not been dealt shadow cards are not dealt
shadow cards this round.

6.3 “Resolve enemy attacks” process begins
This step formalizes the beginning of the “enemy
attacks” process. In the steps that follow, each enemy
that is engaged with a player will have one opportunity
to make an attack.

6.4a Next enemy attack initiates
The active player (starting with the first player) chooses
an eligible enemy that they are engaged with to resolve
its attack. An eligible enemy is one that has not yet
attacked this round and is still able to attack.
Use the “Enemy Attack Resolution” flowchart to
resolve an enemy’s attack.
If no eligible enemies remain for the active player to
choose, proceed to 6.5.

6.5 Next player becomes active player
The next player (in player order) becomes the active
player. Return to step 6.4a.
If all players have resolved enemy attacks, proceed to
6.6.

6.6 “Resolve enemy attacks” process ends
This step formalizes the end of the “enemy attacks
process.

6.7 “Resolve player attacks” process begins
This step formalizes the beginning of the “player
attacks” process. In the steps that follow, each player
will have opportunities to declare attacks with their
ready characters against enemies.

24

6.8a Active player declares next attack

Enemy Attack Resolution

The active player (starting with the first player) may
declare an attack against one of their enemies.

6.4b Enemy attack initiates

Use the “Player Attack Resolution” flowchart to
resolve a player’s attack.

The active player chooses which attack (among the
enemies to they are engaged that has not yet attacked
this round) to resolve.

If the active player is unable to or chooses not to
declare an attack, proceed to 6.9.

6.4.1 Declare defender

6.9 Next player becomes active player
The next player (in player order) becomes the active
player. Return to step 6.8a.
If all players have resolved player attacks, proceed to
6.10.

6.10 “Resolve player attacks” process ends
This step formalizes the end of the “player attacks”
process.

6.11 Combat phase ends

The active player may choose one ready character
they control to declare as a defender for this attack. A
character must exhaust to be declared as a defender.
The active player may instead decide to let the
attack go undefended by declaring no defenders for
that attack.
Unless a card ability specifies otherwise, a player can
only declare defenders against enemies with whom
they are engaged.

6.4.2 Resolve shadow effect

This step formalizes the end of the combat phase.
Discard all shadow cards from all enemies at this time.

The active player flips the attacking enemy’s shadow
card faceup and resolves any shadow effect the card
might have.

VII. Refresh Phase

6.4.3 Determine combat damage

7.1 Refresh phase begins
This step formalizes the beginning of the refresh phase.

7.2 Ready cards
Simultaneously ready all exhausted cards.

7.3 Raise threat
Each player simultaneously increases their threat by 1.

7.4 Pass first player token
The first player passes the first player token to the next
player (clockwise) to their left. That player becomes
the new first player.

7.5 Refresh phase ends
This step formalizes the end of the combat phase.

0.1 Round ends
This step formalizes the end of a game round. Proceed
to step 0.0 of the next game round.

Combat damage is determined by subtracting the
defense strength (Ú) of the defending character from
the attack strength (Û) of the attacking enemy. The
remaining value is the amount of damage that must
immediately be dealt to the defending character. If the
Ú is equal to or higher than the Û, no damage is dealt.
If an attack is undefended, all damage from the attack
must be assigned to a single hero controlled by the
active player. If a defending character leaves play or is
removed from combat before damage is assigned, the
attack is considered undefended. A character’s Ú does
not absorb damage from undefended attacks.
If a character is destroyed by an attack, additional
damage from the attack is not dealt to other
other characters.

6.4.4 Enemy attack ends
This step formalizes the end of the enemy’s attack.
Return to step 6.4a in the main flowchart.

The end of a round is an important game milestone
that may be referenced in card text, either as a point
at which an ability may or must resolve, or as a point
at which a lasting effect or constant ability begins
or expires.

25

Player Attack Resolution
6.8b Player attack initiates
The active player chooses 1 enemy with whom they
are currently engaged, and exhausts any number of
characters they control to declare them as attackers
against that enemy.
If each of the attacking characters declared during this
step has ranged, the attack may be declared against any
enemy that is engaged with any player.

6.8.1 Ranged option
Any number of ranged characters controlled by other
players may exhaust to be declared as attackers.

6.8.2 Determine attack strength
Add up the total Û of all characters that are
currently attacking.

6.8.3 Determine combat damage
This is done by subtracting the target enemy’s Ú
from the combined Û of all the attacking characters.
The remaining value is the amount of damage that is
immediately dealt to the target enemy being attacked.
If the Ú is equal to or higher than the Û, no damage
is dealt.

6.8.4 Player attack ends
This step formalizes the end of the attack.
Characters that were declared as attackers are only
considered to be attacking through the resolution of this
step (and all reactions to it).
Return to step 6.8a in the main flowchart.

26

Appendix II: Card Anatomy
This section presents a detailed anatomy of each
card type.

Player Deck Anatomy Key

3
5
6
7
8
9

Hero

1

10
11
13

12
2

Ally

5
6
7

1

4
10

8

11
13

12
Attachment

Event

2
1

2
1

4

4
10

11
12

13

12

11
13
27

Encounter Deck Anatomy Key

2
3
4
5

Enemy

8

1

7

9
10
13

12
Location

3

1

8

9

10

6
12

14

9

Treachery

8

1

10
12

Under the Shadow

1

Objective

8
6/15

When Revealed: Until the end of the phase, raise
the total $ in the staging area by X, where X is the
number of players in the game.

13

12

Shadow: Defending player raises their threat by the
number of enemies with which they are engaged.

Illus. Igor Kieryluk

28

13

TREACHERY
©2021 Middle-earth Enterprises ©2021 FFG

104

10
11
13

Quest Deck Anatomy Key

3

1

Quest Side A

2

5

4

6
7
3
8

1

Quest Side B

5

2

6
7

29

Appendix III:
Campaign Mode
Campaign mode is an exciting alternative way of
playing The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game that
combines all of the scenarios from the core set into one
epic adventure! To play Campaign Mode, the players
play through each scenario in order. Players only
advance to the next scenario after they have defeated
the current scenario. If the players lose a scenario, there
is no penalty, but they must play it again and defeat it
before they can advance to the next scenario.

If a player is required to replace a fallen hero but there
are no heroes remaining in the players’ collection of
available heroes, that player instead takes a permanent
+1 threat penalty, but removes that hero from the list of
Fallen Heroes and continues to play with the hero.

Campaign Log

Additional Card Types

During a campaign, the results of each scenario can
affect the outcome of the next one, and the decisions
made in each adventure may influence future scenarios.
The Campaign Log is used to track the course and
development of the entire campaign.
At the end of each scenario, players record their results
by entering all of the relevant information in the
Campaign Log (on pages 32-33).
When setting up a subsequent scenario in Campaign
Mode, the players refer to the Campaign Log to make
sure they are using all of the correct cards.

Fellowship of Heroes
While playing Campaign Mode, players record the
names of their heroes in the Campaign Log at the
beginning of the first scenario. If a hero is in a player’s
discard pile at the end of the game, that hero’s name is
added to the list of Fallen Heroes in the Campaign Log.
A hero whose name appears on the list of Fallen Heroes
cannot be used by any player while playing future
scenarios in that campaign.
While playing Campaign Mode, players may change
the cards in their decks between games, but they
must use the same heroes for each scenario with two
exceptions:
◊ If a hero is in its controller’s discard pile at the
end of a scenario, that hero’s name is added to the
list of Fallen Heroes and its controller may choose
a new hero when setting up the next game. The
new hero is recorded in the Campaign Log and
each player receives a permanent +1 starting threat
penalty for the rest of the campaign.

30

◊ If a player wishes to trade a hero they control for a
hero with a different name between scenarios, that
player may replace 1 hero they control with a new
hero when setting up the next game. The new hero
is recorded in the Campaign Log and each player
receives a permanent +1 starting threat penalty for
the rest of the campaign.

There are three additional card types that are used
only in Campaign Mode: campaign cards, boons, and
burdens. These card types are described below.
Campaign Cards
The campaign card is a card type that serves to place
a scenario within the larger campaign. While setting
up a scenario in Campaign Mode, place the campaign
card for that scenario next to the quest deck and follow
any additional setup instructions on the card. After
defeating a scenario, turn over the campaign card
and follow any resolution instructions, updating the
Campaign Log accordingly.
Boons
Boons are player cards (and occasionally encounter
cards) that must be earned by playing through a
scenario in Campaign Mode. These cards represent
the beneficial consequences of player choices and
outcomes throughout the course of a campaign. Players
are not permitted to include these cards in a game
until after they are earned, unless a scenario directs
them otherwise.
Burdens
Burdens are encounter cards (and occasionally player
cards) that can be earned while playing through a
scenario in Campaign Mode and are subsequently
included in the encounter deck. Instead of an encounter
set icon, burdens have a burden set icon used to
identify which burden set they belong to. Because
burdens do not belong to an encounter set, they are
not included in an encounter deck until the players are
instructed to include them.

Campaign Pool
The list of boons and burdens that players earn as they
play through a campaign is called the Campaign Pool.
After defeating a scenario and recording its results in
the Campaign Log, list all boons and/or burdens earned
in the Campaign Pool section of the log.
When the players earn a boon or burden card, they
enter that card’s title in the Campaign Pool. If a card
has the Permanent keyword, the players record which
hero it is attached to in the notes section of the log.
While setting up future scenarios in the campaign, the
boon and burden cards listed in the Campaign Pool are
added to the game in the following manner:
◊ Boons with a player card back may be added to a
player’s deck. These cards do not count against a
deck’s minimum.
◊ Burdens with a player card back must be added to
a player’s deck. These cards do not count against a
deck’s minimum.
◊ If a boon or burden with the Permanent keyword
was recorded as being attached to a specific hero,
that card must be attached to the specified hero at
the start of the game.
◊ If a boon or burden card has an encounter card
back, that card must shuffled into the encounter
deck when setting up the game.
If a hero is added to the list of fallen heroes, all
boons and burdens with the permanent keyword that
had been attached to that hero are removed from the
Campaign Pool.

Expert Campaign Mode

Campaign Setup Checklist
When setting up a game for a campaign, use this list to
ensure that all campaign elements are accounted for in
the game:
1. Check that each player is using the heroes
listed in the Campaign Log. (If this is the first
game of the campaign, each player lists their name
and heroes in the Campaign Log.)
2. Ensure that none of the heroes are listed as
fallen heroes. If a player’s hero is listed as fallen,
that player must select a new hero. Remove any
permanent boons or burdens that were attached to
the fallen hero from the Campaign Pool.
3. If a player wishes to voluntarily change heroes,
list the new heroes in the Campaign Log and add
1 to the threat penalty area in the log for each
hero changed.
4. Apply threat penalty. Each player sets their
starting threat, adding the amount recorded in the
threat penalty area of the log to their total.
5. Attach permanent cards. Attach any permanent
boon or burden cards listed in the Campaign Pool
to their specified hero.
6. Check setup cards. Put any boon or burden
cards with the Setup keyword into the play area.
7. Set player decks. Shuffle any boon or burden
player cards listed in the Campaign Pool into the
appropriate player decks.
8. Set encounter deck. Shuffle any boon or burden
encounter cards listed in the Campaign Pool into
the encounter deck.

Expert Campaign Mode is an alternative version of
Campaign Mode for players who crave a tougher
challenge. Players do not reset the hit points of their
heroes in between scenarios of an expert campaign. At
the end of each scenario, record the number of damage
tokens on each hero in the “Notes” section of the
Campaign Log. Then, when setting up the next scenario
of the campaign, place a number of damage tokens
on each hero control equal to the number listed in the
Notes section of the Campaign Log. Each player may
choose instead to heal this starting damage from a hero
they control at a cost of a permanent +1 penalty to their
starting threat for each hero healed in this way.

31

TM

CAMPAIGN LOG
Player 1

Player 2

Player 3

Player 4

Heroes

Heroes

Fallen Heroes

Threat Penalty

Notes

32

Players may photocopy this page for their own personal use.

Scenarios Completed
Scenario Name

Campaign Pool
Score

Boons

Burdens

Campaign Total:

Players may photocopy this page for their own personal use.

33

Index
A
Ability 2
Action 3
Active Location 3
Active Player 3
After 3
Ally 3
Attachment Cards 3
Attack Strength 4
Attacks Outside the Combat Phase 4

F
First Player / First Player Token 8
Forced 8
Framework Effects and Framework Steps 9

B

G

Base Value 4
Boon Cards 30
Blank 4
Burden Cards 30

Gains 9
Golden Rules 2
Grim Rule 2
Guarded 9

C

H

Campaign Cards 30
Campaign Mode 30
Cancel 4
Cannot 4
“Cannot be damaged” 4
“Cannot have attachments” 4
Card Types 4
Character Cards 4
“Choose” 5
Combat Phase 5
Constant Ability 5
Control 5
Copy (of a card) 5
Cost 5
Current Quest 5

Hero Cards 9
Hit Points 9

D

Lasting Effects 10
Limits 11
Location Cards 11

Damage 5
Deckbuilding 6
Defending Player 6
Defense Strength 6
Delayed Effects 6
Destroy 6
Discard Pile and Victory Display 6
Doomed 6
Drawing Cards 6

E
Effects 7
Encounter Deck 7

34

Encounter Phase 7
Enemy Cards 7
Engaged 7
Engagement Check 7
Enters Play 7
Event Cards 7
Exhausted 8
Explored 8

I
Immune 9
In Play and Out of Play 9
Initial Threat Level 10
Initiating Abilities / Playing Cards 10
In Player Order 10
Instead 10

K
Keywords 10

L

M
May 11
Modifiers 11
Move 11
Mulligan Draw 11
Multiple Defenders 11

N

S

Neutral Cards 12
Next Player 12

Scoring 15
Search 15
Self-referential Abilities 15
Sentinel 15
Setup 16
Shadow Effects 16
Spheres of Influence 16
Staging 17
Staging Area 17
Surge 17
Switch 17

O
Objective Cards 12
Optional Engagement 12
Out of Play 12
Ownership and Control 12

P
Planning Phase 12
Play and Put into Play 12
Play Restrictions and Permissions 13
Player Deck 13
Player Elimination 13
Playing a Card 13
Printed 13
Priority of Simultaneous Resolution 13
Put into Play 13

T

Qualifiers 13
Quest Advancement 13
Quest Cards / Quest Deck 13
Quest Phase 13

Table Talk 17
Then 17
Threat / Threat Dial 17
Threat Elimination Level 17
Timing of Ability Resolution 18
To 18
Traits 18
Travel 18
Travel Phase 18
Treachery Cards 18
Triggered Ability 18
Triggering Condition 18
Type, Types 19

R

V

Q

Ranged 14
Ready 14
Refresh Phase 14
Removed from Game 14
Replacement Effects 14
Resources 14
Resource Match 14
Resource Phase 14
Response 14
Restricted 15
Reveal 15
Running out of Cards 15
Running out of Tokens 15

Victory 19

W
Willpower Strength 19
Winning the Game 19

X
The letter “X” 19

TM/® & © 2021 Fantasy Flight Games. Middle-earth, The Lord of the Rings, and the characters, events, items and places therein, are trademarks or registered trademarks of The Saul Zaentz
Company d/b/a Middle-earth Enterprises and are used, under license, by Fantasy Flight Games. Gamegenic and the Gamegenic logo are TM & © Gamegenic GmbH, Germany. All rights
reserved to their respective owners. Fantasy Flight Games, 1995 West County Road B2, Roseville, Minnesota, 55113, USA, 651-639-1905. Actual components may vary from those shown.
UK:
Asmodee United Kingdom
Unit 6 Waterbrook Road
Alton Hampshire, GU34 2UD
United Kingdom

EU:
Asmodee Nordics
Valseholmen 1
2650 Hvidovre
Danemark

Asmodee The Netherlands,
Vossenbeemd 51
5706 CL Helmond
The Netherlands

35

